---
type: post
lang: en
title: "Why Am I Disturbed When Things Do Not Go My Way?"
authors:
  - Bhakti Sudhir Goswami
date: "2020-03-13"
audio:
  file: en_2020-03-13_Why_Am_I_Disturbed_When_Things_Do_Not_Go_My_Way.mp3
duration: "00:58:25"
status: draft
slug: en-2020-03-13-why-am-i-disturbed-when-things-do-not-go-my-way
license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
---

Speaker 1
(Om jnana timirandhasya jnananjana shalakaya caksur unmilitam yena) tasmai sri-gurave namah mukham karti vacalam pungkum alang hayate girim yat krpa tam aham vande sri-gurunde natarinam vande 'ham sri-guru sri-juta-pada-kamalam sri-guror vaisnavams ca. sri-rupam sa grajatam saha-guna-raghunatam vitam tam sa jivam sadwaitam sa avadhutam parijana-sahitam sri-krsna-caitanya-devam sri-radha-krsna-padan sahagina-lalita-sri-visakanvitams ca ananda-lilamaya vigrahaya himava divyac chavi-sundaraya tasmai maha-prema-rasa-pradaya caitanya-candraya namo namaste." There's Caitanya Chandraya. Chandra... Caitanya Chandra, Gaurachandra. So much moon comparisons. Yeah. Are there some questions?

Speaker 2
Yes, Maharaj. (speaks in foreign language) We have a question from Guru Maharaj. "If I believe that Krishna consciousness is the truth, the whole truth and nothing-"

Speaker 1
And nothing but the truth.

Speaker 2
"... but the truth, and that-"

Speaker 1
How could I know? (laughs)

Speaker 2
(laughs) "And that everything happens for our own benefit, then why am I still disturbed when things don't go the way I expect them to? Is it just my ego and forgetfulness of Krishna?"

Speaker 1
Most likely. (laughs)

Speaker 2
(laughs)

Speaker 1
The one... Actually, the child of Yogamaya and Ashutosh Krishna, uh, Gorindu, another golden moon, is a very thoughtful child, interested in Sanskrit and slokas and things like... And he read this part of the Bhagavatam where Gajendra, um, you know, was previously Indradyumna, South Indian King, did not properly receive a Vaishnava or thought offensively about them. Sometimes Guru Maharaj said it was an elephant-like response. I'm not sure what that means. But then next birth, elephant Gajendra, and where... In the waters, enjoying with so many she-elephants. Then a crocodile grabbed him and they fought for a thousand celestial years. And at la- and it's mentioned there, the demigods could not save him. Or ex- excuse me, they were offended that he did not, uh, invoke their presence. Rather, he appealed to the Lord Narayana. So the child, he's asking, he's saying, like, "But aren't they devotees?" Like, why were they... Uh... His question was two-fold. One was like, "But aren't they devotees? Why would they be offended at being passed over in this instance, being that they're devotees?" And what was the part two? Oh, why he's appealing directly to the Lord and not to, like, guru or Vaishnava. Uh, a child is asking those question. So, I had to think about that for some time and study that pastime, and then also think of what we hear from Guru Maharaj. We don't feel we have any, um, separate qualification. Sometimes Srila Avadhut Maharaj and I, we remind each other, 'cause he has an exhibition what is called sanskara. And then conventionally, sanskara, it means mental impressions. Actually, life after life accumulates one mental im- (slaps hands) another, f- (slaps hands) so many mental impressions. That is... But sanskara, there's also the reformatory process in Vedic culture, right? Garbhadhana sanskara, et cetera. Uh, but what we will share with one another, and w- we're spinning it in our favor, is that we're saying we don't have to wi- We weren't born in Guru Mandal, right? I mean, you appeared in a devotee family, so you're... That's a special position. But we weren't born like that, so we were saying those devotees who, they appeared in Guru Mandal, means basically Bengal, east and west, north and south. Uh, as we heard in the song Maharaj quoted, and, you know... What is it? (sings in foreign language) And there's also one other line that goes with that. (sings in foreign language) Um...So Narottam saying, I see those from Gaura Mandal as eternally liberated associates, and I see that land as Chintamani, right? Sometimes I would think about that in Calcutta. And I would, I would just... And one time I got to (laughs), I was preaching to some man from Jugantar, which is a newspaper, tsk, and as Bengalis will sometimes he is, we're repeating what we've heard from our Guru Varga. And he is saying, "How do you know all these things?" So I'm saying, "Well, Guru Mahārāj, Guru Dev, Prabhupād my..." But at, I knelt down on the street in Calcutta and there was this dust, tsk, like sand, but shiny re-, and it was just like the sand in Vrindavan. And I was just holding it up and letting it sp- and I told him, I said, "I know very little actually, but of what I've got from them, even a little from such a source, your thinking is vast, uh, knowledge and infinite wis-" And it is. A drop of the infinite is infinite, right? So, but what was I saying? Oh, so, um, uh, why was I saying this? Related to Indradyumna Gajendra?

Speaker 2
Um, Goorender Prabhu asked that question.

Speaker 1
That I know.

Speaker 2
Yeah. And after that you turned to saṁskāra.

Speaker 1
Oh, saṁskāra. Impressions.

Speaker 2
Saṁskāras. Impressions.

Speaker 1
Yeah, that's what I wanted to say that. So those born in that land, tsk, like what Gurudev said about one devotee, very nice Vaishnava devotee said, "He was half-made by his father." Like, even before he came, 'cause he grew up in a Vaishnava family and th- uh... As so many of the disciples of Saraswatī Ṭhākur did. But what Avadhūt Mahārāj and I sometimes consider is that, that could also give you some ego, you know? Such an auspicious birth and you're, heard these things. Like Guru Mahārāj's brother, uh, when he heard Achyutananda Mahārāj say... He was the first Westerner to visit Hāpāniyā, went with Guru Mahārāj, Kṛṣṇadas Bābājī Mahārāj, Jaja Mahārāj. Guru Mahārāj hadn't been there many years. And when... And the family members of Guru Mahārāj, they were astonished to see this shaib, m-, you know, white foreigner in the saffron dress, uh, and Ha- and not just in Nabadwip, but Hāpāniyā. I would say many people there had probably never seen, uh, a white person at that moment, up to that moment. So they were... And, and that he's promoting Mahāprabhu's Krishna conception was just more, they were just astonished, and, and one of them said, "How did you c-... We're from here. We have the saṁskāra that we appeared out of this soil." Right? A Sanskritian family. The ladies speak Sanskrit in Guru Mahārāj's family. 'Cause one of his aunties detecting some anti-, uh, female sentiment, and Guru Mahārāj as a young precocious boy, uh, said, "Why are y- why are you like that?" And he said, "Oh, I've read some things in the scriptures." (laughs) And she said, "Well, have you heard this?" And then she quoted the Sanskrit that said women are to be seen as Lakshmigun, you know, from, as representatives of Lakshmi Devi. You know, in Benga- they call you and a lucky. That's, they drop the S, it's Lakshmi, and they say Lucky.

Speaker 2
(laughs)

Speaker 1
They're calling a w- woman Lakshmi. So she said, "D- do you know that?" She quoted the Sanskrit, and Guru Mahārāj is regulated by hearing Sanskrit and Shastric representations, so he said, "I had to readjust my thinking." (laughs) He said, "Then from that day I came to see ladies as, as, uh, you know, extensions of Lakshmi Devi," which is so beautiful. And, you know, his sister took initiation from him, you know what her name was?

Speaker 2
Rama.

Speaker 1
Rama, and I can still hear him. You could, Guru Mahārāj in the room at the time, and you hear Guru Mahārāj go, "Rama," like that, and then she'd go running up the stairs and very... And she looked like very similar to Srila Guru Mahārāj and very s- sweet, Vaishnavi. So if you're born in that place, there could be some ego understandably that you've got something, and you're going to think, "I've got something." But what we're sharing with one another, we're thinking, whatever it appears that we have, we know it was a gift because we didn't, uh, spring out of the soil with this particular conception, at least fully expressed. (laughs) Right? So we know it's a gift from Srila Prabhupad, Srila Sri Dhamara, Srila Gurudev, Srila Govinda Mahārāj.Huh. And we hope to carry that with us. (smacks lips) So what I told him was that, yes, the devata, they're devotees but they may not be suddha bhaktas, pure devotees. Right? And we see this described by Sanatana Goswami in Brihad-Bhagavatamritam where he's telling the journey of Gopa Kumar through all these different plains and, analytically speaking, Indra, Brahma, they're representatives of karmamishra bhakti, means devotion with a mixture of karma. Right? Shiva in this context, remember there's Bhogshiv, uh, Tyagshiv, Bhaktashiv, Tyagshiv, Jnanamishra Bhakti, some tinge there. But for these devatas, you see, Indra Mohan, the, when Indra's bewildered, uh, for the Govardhan Puja pastime, he's inundating right, because they stopped offering sacrifices to him, "What's got into these people? Have they forgot?" So, (swallows) but of course, it's in, it, we will say, "Well, but it is leela." And that's a very profound question because ultimately everything can be adjusted as leela, even the jivas coming under the influence of Maya and then the Lord and His devotees descending to libera- it can also be considered leela. As Bhaktivedanta Thakur puts it, uh, puts it in Jaiva Dharma, someone says, "Why do we have to be in a particular kind of leela that has like a lot of suffering in it?" (laughs) You know? "Couldn't we be in some other kind of pastimes?" (laughs) And that'll be the way. Why like this? And Bhaktivedanta Thakur said, the answer given is that, "Which pastime is free or from suffering? We're told Mother Yashoda, figuratively speaking, cried herself blind in separation from Krishna. Look at the anguish and suffering in the hearts of the Braja gopis, the cowherd boys in separation from Krishna, the Jamuna in separation from Krishna, the cows in separation from Krishna, everyone in separation from Krishna." So there, then there's quality of, there's a debilitating binding suffering that comes as a reaction to illusory enjoyment but then there's this other type of suffering that comes on account of genuine spiritual attachment and affection. Bhaktivedanta Thakur in the Prema-pradip says, "Actually, really, it's Krishna-prem. Krishna-preman nitya-siddha sadrakaubho noi." Right? Think really you have it, right? I remember Prabhupada in one of his purports in the Bhagavad Gita, (swallows) it impressed me many years ago. How about 50? (laughs) You know? Or 45, 45 to 50, in that range. It stuck with me. He said, I'm paraphrasing just a little, he said, "Our natural tendency of love of God is being pervertedly manifested as lust for matter." That. Right? So um, Indra Mohan, Brahma Vimohan, Karmamishra Bhakti, you know, he is also thinking, "What's got into these gods and goddesses? Why are they worshiping this little boy in Vrindavan?" Oh, and when I say leela, pastime, so then the beautiful Brahma falls at the feet of Krishna and although he says, "When it comes to your pastimes, my Lord, others may say they know about you. As far as I'm concerned, I have very little to say." Right? And I said, "Kim bahukten amey prabho janantu eva janantu kim bahu- You know, that mean- others may say what I'm..." And then what kind of, all the beautiful Brahma-stuti. I've mentioned when I got to, uh, serve Srila Prabhupada prasadam and answer his many questions, (laughs) uh, when he asked me, um, like what I was doing and I said, "Well, I'm doing different types of preaching, you know, I, I distribute books to the temples, you know, either ISKCON Press or the BBT warehouse and also go and preach to Indians." We had a program, many Indians in the New York area and Prabhupada went, he's e- like interested, you know? (laughs) And I said, "But Srila Prabhupada," I said, "sometimes I'm, I'm preaching to them and they will, they will say to me, and I can't believe I'm like im- impersonating an Indian"... with Prabhupād, but he has a sense of humor. So I, so I said, "Prabhu..." And they'll say to me, "Oh, I know what is Krishna. I am, I am knowing what is Krishna." You know? And Prabhupād laughed and he had, like, a sweet ball in his hand. He laugh and he, and he said, "That is their disease." (clicks tongue) (laughs) That's the way he said it, "That is their disease." (laughs) That's Brahma-stuti. It's in the prayers of Brahmā. Everything that ever came out of Srila Prabhupāda's mouth is scripture, right? But just in a natural, loving, flowing way. So Brahmā's saying, "Others may say, 'I know what is Krishna,' but as far as I'm concerned, I know very little on this subject." But then the Brahma-stuti comes out. It means the prayers of Brahmā, that if you learn them, uh, all the aspects of Gaudiya Vaishnavism are there. If you just know these prayers, you can preach to everyone, anywhere, at any time, right? But that, it ends up glorifying Brahmā, shining a spotlight on his devotion. Same with Indra. And, and what is Indra's conclusion? Deve varsati yajna-viplavam rusah brijarshv astham abharsanilayam sedut phala-pashuh striyatma-saranam utpatye kansmayam utpatye (sighs) lilo-chilindram jatah vibram ghostam bhavan mahendra-madhabet priyan indro-gavan. Indra says to Krishna, after he realizes his divinity, he's saying, "I am Indra, the King of Heaven, but you're the Indra-gava." Indra means king. They actually have names. That's the title. But when he said, "You're the Indra-gava, you're the king of the cows, the lord of..." And he's not just, like... He was saying, like, "Is that a very nice thing to say?" Like, "I'm the king of heaven (slaps hands), huh, you're the king of cows." Unless we understand these cows are divine, he is divine. So he's saying, "You are Indra-gava." And then if you reverse, that becomes Gava-Indra. He's saying, "You are Govinda." So all of that for Indra to indicate, it appears he's giving him the name Govinda, but he's actually recognizing who is Govinda all along, from the get-go-vida. Iśvaraḥ paramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ (clears throat) sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ anādir ādir govindaḥ sarve kāre (gasps). It's very interesting. Iśvaraḥ paramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ. The parameshvara, the supreme controller to the supreme anima-, is Krishna. Sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. And that Krishna, He's not impersonal, abstract, formless. Sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. He has an eternal form that's full of ananda, bliss, ecstasy, love, affection, beauty, satyam, sivam, sundaram. And, and who is he more specifically? Anādir ādir govindaḥ. He's Govinda, who... Two things, that as he takes care of the cows and gives them full nourishment and everything, he does that for the senses. What do the senses like to do? Exercise their sensory function, right? The, what we can say, the eyes want to see beautiful things, want to behold beauty, but beauty that makes the heart feel something, right? Not just, "Wow." Right? There was a yoga studio in Bangkok, and they have this big ad and it's called Planet Yoga. And their sign says, "California wow." (laughs) Like, "That's what we're selling, folks." (laughs) You know? "Give me some of that California wow." (laughs) And I thought, "This guy is brilliant, whoever he is." (laughs) 'Cause how do you define it? You know, I went there and I wasn't wowed. I mean, how do you prove that? (laughs) But so that, it's, no, we wanna see the most beautiful thing. You know, when everyone says, "Oh, look how beautiful," every (gasps). There was one (clears throat), uh, you know, famous lady and they were interviewing people who watched her (clears throat), and, uh, even women were saying, "She's painfully beautiful." Like, it's, she's so beautiful it's, like, painful to look at her, but, like, in a sweet way. It's a sweet type of pain observing this type of beauty. And if you look, there are slokas like that in the, about Krishna, about Srimati Radharani, about Mahaprabhu, saying, "Put gold in a painful position." That type of golden, right? So Govinda.... means the Lord of the sen- but what does that mean, Lord of the? It means He's the personification of what you could hope to see with your eyes and hear with your ears, the sound of His name, the sound of His flute. When we were saying recently that, you know, Krishna has nothing to do, I heard probably say that also 45 years ago. It was only like two weeks ago, I went, "Oh." (laughs) You know? Realize Krishna has nothing to do, yet He's doing everything. But He plays the flute, right, and has pastimes with His devotees. And then He ex- uh, Balaram's His first other, then Balaram cha- uh, quadruple expansion, second quadruple, purusa avatars, guna avatars, leela ava- on and on and on. Right. (clears throat) So that's Krishna. And what does Rupa Goswami say? Oh, He's just playing the flute. Right. Uh, Rupa Goswami said, "rundann ambu vrtas tamut kati param kurvan bahusthumbharum dyanantaryamsunandanamukhan." Oh, um, muk- uh, what's that one? Dyanantaryamsunandanamukhan. Gopa... No, I'm thinking of another verse. Anyway, he's saying when that, the sound of Kr- He, Rupa Goswami writes this song. Well, you say, "He's just playing the flute." What does it do? Saying the sound of that flute, it penetrates the eight layers of the universe. Rundann ambu vrtas and, you know, the clouds, an- uh, uh, animated things are paralyzed. It's so beautiful, they stop moving. The ina- uh, the animate become inanimate, and the inanimate start to animate. Rocks are melting. (running water) Rundann ambu vrtas tamut kati param kurvan bahusthumbharum. Tumbhuru means the leader of the gandharvas. So that means, arguably, the best singer in the universe and the best tune smith is saying, "I've never heard anything, music like this. This is unbelievable." Dyanantaryamsunandanamukhan viswapinataṁ vedasāṁ. Yeah. So, uh, vedasāṁ viswapinataṁ. And the four Kumaras, remember they're appearing as young boys, totally pure. Um, th- no one can break their meditation. Nothing distracts them, ever. They're totally fixed, always. Right? And hearing the sound of Krishna's flute, he's saying they can't concentrate. (laughs) It's stolen their minds away. Vismapinataṁ vedasāṁ. And Brahma is astonished. otṣu kāḷa-bali-bīrvalim ājāḥ. And Bali Mah... Because what it means, what it's doing is, what Rupa Goswami's doing is sh- the sound is going, it enters the, penetrates the eight layers of the universe, then it's going around the universe. So he has it, now it's going to the bottom. Bali Mahara- that's at the bottom. As he did, "Brahma, Ganda..." You know, he's doing different layers. Now it's going down to the bottom. He's astonished, right? Bali Maharaj. Uh, bhagindrum agurunayam. It means Ananta Dev upon whom all the universes are resting and the planets and everything, his heads are going... It's like he's intoxicated. So his heads are staggering with the intoxicating sound of the flute of Krishna. So when we say, "He's playing the flute," He's not doing... It's destroying everyone in the most beautiful way imaginable. Their senses are becoming destroyed by hearing the beauty of that sound, but in a good way. Govinda is so beautiful to see, to hear, to touch. We were saying the lotus feet of Nityananda, koti-candra surye more soothing than 10 million moons. Well, the taste, Krishna arundhamritam. All prasadam is the result of coming in contact with the lips of Krishna. That's the secret ingredient, according to Mahaprabhu. (drinking water) And the aroma. Right? Back to the Kumaras, we'll say, "tasya aravinda-nayanasya padma-ravinda-kunjalika-mishra-tulasī-makharaṇḍa-vāyuḥ antargata-svaviverena cakara tesam sanksobhyam akshara-jusam api cittatanvo." When they inhale the aroma of Krishna's lotus feet mixed with the tulsi and saffron, and their, uh, minds are stolen and they enter Vaikuntha just by the aroma emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord. So every... Govinda's the total sensual expression of divinity that actually our senses are incessantly seeking.But (Indian). One meaning is substitute. We're substituting so many other things. Uh, or as Prabhupada said, "That natural frame, love for Krishna, is being pervertedly manifested as a lust for matter," right? So, (inhales deeply) that Govinda (laughs). End of brahma... Oh, sanskar and the ego of devotees I think has been expressed there. So, uh, but just to complete, that Gajendra... So because of some offenses he had to take birth as an elephant, hmm? But now he's in this very dangerous situation. Thousand celestial years in the clutches of the crocodile (swallows) and Prabhupad mentions in the purport, he remembered some slokas from his previous life, right? "And so what I told the boy," I said, "Where did he get those?" Guru Visnav. So, that's covered. So he remembers them and he's praying to the Lord. And then the Lord, the- the Narayan comes on riding Garuda and rescues him. So, in the poetry of Srila Rupa Goswami (swallows), he says, "Gajapati Tarana." (swallows) What is that one? Uh, (writing sound). Paramananda gaurima. Oh, (Indian). There's the bib- bibranujagatutuliyam advaitadaita prapanna srivasa janita paramananda gaurima harir dino dari gajapati kripoteg, uh, kripoteka tarala sa chaitanya ki me duso harah priya. Yashati padam. Oh, Gajapati Tarana. That's in Guru Maharaj's song but it's on Rupa Goswami's poetry. Gajapati kripoteka. That... It's interesting. So, Guru Maharaj said that means... It's a reference to... 'Cause Rupa Goswami is saying in this one (Indian). And each thing Guru Maharaj says can be interpreted in two ways. So one means that the form of Mahaprabhu is incomparable. There's no- nothing as beautiful as a Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. The combination of Radha and Krishna, right? But also means (Indian)'s position is incomparable. So, (Indian) meaning Krish- uh, Mahaprabhu's form or (Indian). Advaita is his dearest. (Indian). Paramananda gaurima means Paramananda Puree. And then, (Indian). Rupa Goswami is saying, "I'm de-" You know, he is fallen. But he also mentions Gajapati. And Guru Maharaj said this can mean Gajendra or Gajapati Pratap Rudra Mah- Maharaj. And interestingly, in the (Indian) it says that Indradumna appeared as Pratap Rudra Maharaj. So there's your Gajapati. Uh, 'cause Gajapati also means, uh, Elephant King. Uh, so, he appears in Gora Lila as Pratap Rudra Maharaj and all, and was also saved by the Lord. But here the prayers that he's singing are the Gopi Gita. (Indian). And Mahaprabhu, then he said, "Oh, (Indian)." It means, "Yes, they're the real givers who tell us about Krishna. They're the real welfare workers in this world, the real altruists, the real humanitarians. The real saviors who tell us about Krishna. The nectar of his topics that will put an end to the sufferings of our material existence and forgetfulness of our relationship with Krishna, and bring about divine remembrance." And will also... The same thing is the, uh, medicine for the hearts of the Braja Gopis who are feeling the pain, pangs of separation from Krishna. And the beginning o- of the 10th canto, first chapter was going to describe the appearance of Krishna which, by the way, is the heart-to-heart transaction of Vasudeva and Devaki. Same thing for Jagannath Misra and Sacimata. Now it says, (Indian).Where it says, uh, remember, He's fasting for seven days. Water and solid fo- fasting until death. And He tells (?), He said, "I'm not thirsty or hungry because I'm drinking this nectar from you. You're telling me all these wonderful things, the Krishna Katha, and that's nourishing me. I'm not tired, I'm not hungry, I'm not thirsty. I'm feasting upon this substance." And He said, "And how wonderful it is," because oṣadh means, uh, medicine. And we know generally medicine, especially the kind they always said that's really good for you, always taste the worst (laughs), right? And, you know, the so-called bitter pill to swallow, right? And he's saying, "bhava, bhava osadhacchā, this is the medicine that cures bhava rog." That means material existence in Sanskrit. He's saying, but it's, uh, Ÿṣocan mano 'bhirāma, hearing it, mano abhirām. Abhirām means beautiful. Mano. It's... Beautifies the mind. Your mind becomes beautiful just hearing about these things. The response of the mind to Krishna Katha is to beautify, right? And therefore you're drinking the medicine, uh, uh, internally. So he said, "This is nice. This medicine tastes so good and it's the cure for material disease." So, hmm, what was the question? It was two parts, right?

Speaker 3
Yes. I still disturbed... Why I'm still disturbed when things don't go the way I expect them to do, uh, to, and is it just my ego and forgetfulness of Krishna?

Speaker 1
Yes, because as much as we've heard, still we're holding out (laughs) that things are gonna go our way. You know, that, like, we're told, "Not a blade of grass moves without the will of God." And, you know, s- every time I see the grass blowing, you know, in this way, and I go like, "I didn't say you could do that."

Speaker 3
(laughs)

Speaker 1
So I go, "Oh, and they're not listening to me because I'm not that person. Without my will that not a blade of grass mo-" You know, there's somebody else who has that position. And it's described in the Gita, Ÿṣāṁ bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram (Gita 3.41). Bhoktārām, the supreme enjoyer, that still sticks in our craw a little bit. You know, we're sort of like, "But what's in it for me?" So if we just... We're the fodder for Krishna's enjoyment, we'll end up, like, really being ecstatic, right? You know, we'll taste ecstasy, you know. The... And, and it's understandable to think that way, but then we hear, "The great devotees do not think that way." So there has to be some point where we stop thinking the, of this as a, what do you call it? Something and reward. Trade-off. But there's something and reward. There's a word that comes before that, like, sacrifice and reward or something. And what are the examples Rupa Goswami gives? In other words, it's understandable in, in, uh, a lower position that we're thinking, "What can we get from this?" Right? Uh, or, "How much of my conception can I impose on the environment?" Uh, whereas the higher devotees are seeing the environment, that Krishna's friendly hand is behind the environment, so they're interpreting it, uh, as best they can in a positive light. The higher up they go, the more directly they see Krishna's involvement. We can at least understand that theoretically. But, um, Rupa Goswami gives the example of Daruka, Krishna's charioteer, and Srimati Radharani herself, saying Daruka, his service is fanning, one of his services, right, besides, uh, the, driving the chariot. So he's fanning Krishna and as we said, Krishna is inconceivably beautiful. You're sitting there fanning Krishna and you get lost in his beauty and realize, "And who am I? I'm the person who gets to sit here and do this?" (laughs) You know, like, "What did I... (laughs) Like, how specially it must be." You momentarily gets overwhelmed, which is understandable. You're standing next to the infinite. Que- like, we see men in this world next to a beautiful woman, sometimes they become awkward. He's standing next to the inconceivably beautiful Krishna and trying to f- and then ecstasy comes to him, and one type is stumbha, to become stunned. Y- statue-like, you can't move. So he can no longer fan, and what is his response? As...... uh, he, t- not to enjoy that moment, but he's thinking, "Curse that ecstasy. Why did it have to come now and interfere with my seva?" So anyway, like, that's unthinkable to us, but that's the example Rupa Goswami is giving of what a devotee... how a real devotee responds. Uh, you know, of the parshada, highest level, eternal associate of the Lord. And Srimati Radharani, when she's crying ecstatic tears it's blurring her eyes so she can't clearly see Krishna, and it's just driving her mad, and she's cursing the ecstasy because it flooded her eyes with tears and blurred the beautiful form of Krishna. So we have to think, "What is Krishna consciousness?" We have to think how beautiful that is. So, um, we're told that the Mahabhagavata... And I'll preface this by saying, if, if we think like, "Wow, that seems great to... Why would, would we want anything less?" We wanna hear what the highest thing is, next to that, next to that, to understand. Otherwise they wouldn't... If it was something that was never ever possible, it wouldn't be men- why mention it, right? But it's to show what it's... the substantial devotees are like in that plane ...

Speaker 4
(laughs)

Speaker 1
... and we're s- what is the position of a Mahabhagavata? To see Krishna everywhere and in everything. And I think, "Well, what does everywhere mean?" I think everywhere.

Speaker 4
(laughs)

Speaker 1
Like Gurudev and Guru Maharaj sometimes... Because there was, like, manywhere and anywhere, and they'd go, "Uh, manywhere."

Speaker 4
(laughs)

Speaker 1
(laughs) Not everywhere, not anywhere, but manywhere. (laughs)

Speaker 4
(laughs)

Speaker 1
But here it says, "Everywhere and in everything." Y- yeah, but, I mean, what is everything really? I think it means everything. Everywhere and in everything. You go, "Ugh, that's not possible. What about..." Yes, even in that. Everywhere and in everything, either directly or indirectly. Read the Srimad Bhagavatam. It's in the second canto. Everything is either directly or indirectly Krishna. It's s- that, uh, so-called catuh-sloki, four nutshell slokas. As the Gita has four, the Bhagavatam has four. And that's one of the Bhagavatam slokas. Everything, directly or indirectly. It has to be. Otherwise it would be something that existed independently of him, which is impossible, right? So hearing at least that there is such a plane and there are such devotees... Like Guru Maharaj told a sweet story of Gaura Kisora Das Babaji Maharaj and in that... Remember, the, the, the avadhuts, the... These type of babaj- they're, uh, thought by ordinary people to be mad or, um, polluted or whatever, so they're often abused by socie-... Even Sukadev, on his way to the assembly of Pariksit Maharaj and the sages, was being abused by, uh, children. They're making fun of him, throwing things at him, and then they see, uh, he's wa- he's a 16-year-old boy walking naked. They think he's mad, right? But when he walks in the whole assembly rises and offers him the presidential seat, and they're saying, "Oh, maybe we got that wrong." And there they see just by his form that he's divine. That's in the Bhagavatam. How beautiful the body of Sukadev Goswami was. And they just rose and... And they have big long beards, some of them. Who knows how old they are? You know, yugas, thousands of years, and they're, they offer the presidential seat to a 16-year-old boy. Uh, what is their vision? Now Babaji Maharaj, they're throwing things at him, calling him names, and Guru Maharaj said, "What does he say?" He said, "Krishna, I know it is you behind this. Y- you're moving their hands, throwing the thing- making them say all these things. It's you using them to insult me like this and f- abuse me." He said, "But I know how to deal with you, so I will go to Mom Yashoda, and then she'll take care of you." So just to know that that kind of vision can be real, that it was real in Gaura Kisora Das Babaji Maharaj, we... Not to imitate that. That would be mockery, right? We're told, "To imitate the Mahabhagavata, you will go down." But still to know that there is a plane where that sort of vision is real is something wonderful and aspirational. (sighs) (drinks)And Prabhupada's, uh, statement from long ago was, he would say, you know, "You have your plans, I have my plans, and Krishna has his plans." (laughs) So... But Gurudev said something very beautiful at the open- uh, the installation of, what was the name? Radha Raman Sundar Jiu in Kaikali? That's the name, was it? Radha Raman? Yeah. Very beautiful deities there. And he said that, uh... Trying to remember why he said... Some things came up about what should be done, or what does Krishna want, and I remember him speaking about how the will of the Vaishnava is everything. Because we'll say, he's always saying, "The wills of Krishna." That was also one of his expressions. But this time, he was saying, "The will of the Vaishnava." Because why? Krishna's Bhaktavatsala. He is in love with his devotees, he favors them, he has unconditional love and affection for them. So... And as Rupa Goswami tells us, and in the language of Guru Maharastra, "When the infinite comes under the control of the finite, that's the sign of devotion." So it's true, it's the will of Krishna, but Krishna himself says, 'Ahambakta paradhino hi asvantara eva dvija.' Although it's announced in the beginning of the Bhagavatam that, "I'm, uh, independent, swarat." Right? 'Janma dyas cha yato vayadi trtasya ca arthesu abhijah swarat.' Saying, 'Ahambakta paradhino hi asvantara eva dvija sarubhir bhakta-hridayo bhakter bhakta-janah priyah.' He said, "But in the presence of devotion, My devotee, it's as if I lose My independence." So Narottam Thakur advises... Ah. Hm. Forget the Bangla. When he said, 'Ashraya loya bhaje tare Krishna na hi tyaje ekarane,' something. Yeah. 'Ashraya loya ba-' He's saying, "Take shelter of Krishna's devotee, then you get Krishna automatically." Saying, "Krishna, He's unpredictable, in trying to deal with Him directly." He said, "But if you take shelter of His devotee, then automatically you get Krishna." All right? (clears throat) So, what I mean by saying this is that, uh... The higher devote- it's as if they can bend the will of Krishna by the pull of their devotional hearts. So we want to come in connection with them through a serv- association and service. And try and see how what is coming down to us from the service plane, how that can be implemented in the world, and not confuse what we may want with that. It could be, but is it? That we need to know. It's not that it can't be. It can be the same thing, but is it? So Srila Guru Maharaj said, "We should not be overly confident in our own judgment or assessment of things." And that leads us to seek the counsel of, uh, superior servitors, senior devotees. Or he said, "Those whose opinions are reliable." Right? We're told Bhakti Vinod Thakur, he's having visions of Mayapur. Still he approaches, uh, Jagannath Das Babaji Maharaj for confirmation. Right? Sanatana Goswami, when- he, what did we tell? Um, who was it? Jagadananda Pandit told him, Sanatana Goswami said, "I came here to be with Mahaprabhu thinking, you know, I will achieve the highest auspiciousness, and I'm getting just the opposite." Because he contacted some disease on the way and Mahaprabhu's embracing him, and the diseased part of his body's going on to define form of Mahaprabhu, who said, "To me," he said, "it's like chatuhsums, like the mother and the baby." You know, "I don't, I'm not offended by this. In fact, I love it." But it was too much for Sanatana Goswami, approaches Jagadananda, says, "I'm thinking I should just go back to

Speaker 5
(laughs).

Speaker 1
Vrindavan. What do you think?" "Yeah, I think you should also go." This will simultaneously confirm and contradict what I just said (laughs). Sorry, he says to Mahaprabhu, "I consulted with Jagadananda and I'm gonna be going." And he said, "Jaga-"... you know, "Jagadish, he's just a boy and he dares instruct you?" So Mahaprabu didn't like that, that someone in l- a lower position instructed the senior most, Sanatana Goswami. But another point to observe is that, what is the humility of Sanatana Goswami? He's arguably the guru of the six Goswamis, including Sri Rupa, although he considers himself a Rupanuga. Right? But his humility allows him to approach someone junior to him and say, "What do you think I should do?" Why him? Because he is, uh, part of Mahaprabu's serving group. But still, the humility of Sanatana to approach someone in a, a subordinate, and to take his advice. So then what should be our position? So sometimes we may get carried away with ideas we have, but it's best to, uh... And they may be good, you know, service related. Still, we confer with other devotees to find out if they also concur that, yes, this i- this is good, this is the desired service. Right? Srila Prabhupada in America when he was feeling ill and had not achieved so much success yet, wrote a letter to Srila Guru Mahara saying, like, "I'm thinking I should go. I feel like I'm maybe going to be leaving the world. I think I should go back to India." And Guru Maharaj wrote him a letter saying, "No, Prabhupada..." You know the word prabhu-datta-desh means the, where prabhu or guru gives you to preach. He said, "I think Prabhupada, Saraswati Thakur, has given you that place." And Prabhupada said, "I take your order on my head." Means, you know, "I'm accepting it as coming from Prabhupada himself that I should stay." Right? So again, his humility to... He has pure visions and plans for implementing Krishna consciousness in America, but he is open to reading the environment when it's favorable for that or not, and consulting with others. So, we should do the same, because we don't want our attempt, our service attempts, to be ego-driven, right? Then that disqualifies it from actually being service proper, right? ado arpita pashchat create. Sri Idhar Swami and parsing the Śravaṇa-kirtanaṁ śloka, Prahlad Maharaj said, "At the basis of all of this must be self-giving, self-sacrifice." And that means non-assertion. Not ego assertion. Non-assertive, non-aggressive. That, Saraswati Thakur said, is hi- humility. Non-aggressive, non-assertive. Hare Krishna.

---

Omajna timrandasya Jnanjana Salakaya Chaksuru Militam Jaina Tazmay Sri Gurude Namo Mukham Karuti Bachalam Pangolanghayategirim Yat kripa Tamahang Bande Sri Guru Ndinatarinam Bandeham Sri Guru Srijata Parakamalam Sri Guru Sri Rupam Sagarajatam Sahagana Raganathang Vitang Tang Sajivam Saadhvaitam Saavadutam Parijana Sahitam Sri Krishna Chaitanya Devam Sri Radha Krishna Padana Sahagana Lalitha Sriva Shakan vitangscha Ananda Leelamaya Vigrahaya Himava Divyachtavi Sundaraya Tasmay Mahaprema Rasa Pradaya Chaitanya Chandraya Namo Namaste. And there's Chaitanya Chandraya Chandra Chaitanya Chandra Gaurachandra. So much moon comparisons. Are there some question? Yes. Maharaj Dhandavad. We have a question from Gornatharaj Prabhu Dandavas Maharaj, if I believe that Krishna consciousness is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, how could I know? And that everything happens for our own benefit, then why am I still disturbed when things don't go the way I expect them to? Is it just my ego and forgetfulness of Krishna? Most likely one actually the child of Yoga Maya and Ashutosh Krishna Gorendu another golden moon. It's a very thoughtful child, interested in Sanskrit and slokas and things. And he read this part of the Bhagavatam where Gajendra was previously indradumna South Indian king did not properly receive a Vaishnava or thought offensively about them. Sometimes groomer said it was an elephant like response. I'm not sure what that means. But then next birth elephant Gajendra and we're heard and the waters enjoying with so many she elephants. Then crocodile grabbed him and they fought for a thousand celestial years. And at last, and it's mentioned there, the demigods could not save him. Or excuse me, they were offended that he did not invoke their presence. Rather he appealed to the Lord Narayan. So the child he is asking, he's saying like but aren't they devotees? Like why were they? His question was twofold. One was like but aren't they devotees? Why would they be offended at being passed over in this instance? Being that they're devotees? And what was the part two. Oh, why he's appealing directly to the Lord and not to like Guru or Vaishnava. A child is asking those questions. So I had to think about that for some time and study that past time and then also think of what we hear from Guru Maharaj. We don't feel we have any separate qualification. Sometimes Rla Avadutmars and I, we remind each other because he has an exhibition, whether it's called Sanskara and then conventionally Sanskar, it means mental impressions. Actually life after life accumulate one mental another. So many mental impressions, that is. But Sanskar, there's also the reformatory process and Vedic culture, garba dhan, sanskar, etc. But what we will share with one another and we're spinning it in our favor as that was saying we don't have to wor. We weren't born in Gaura Mandal. You appeared in a devotee family, so you're. That's a special position. But we weren't born like that. So we were saying those devotees who they appeared in Goromondo means basically Bengal, east and west, north and south. As we heard in the song Myra is quoted and you know, what is it? Goramandalabhoomi Jeba jani Chintamani Mani Sri Gauramandalabhumi. And there's also one other line that goes with that. Gorangera sanghe jani nity Siddha Koremane. So Narottam saying I see those from Gaura Mandal as eternally liberated associates and I see that land as Chintamini. Sometimes I would think about that in Calcutta and I would just. And one time I got. I was preaching to some man from Jugantar, which is a newspaper. And as Bengalis will sometimes we're repeating what we've heard from our Guru Varga. And he is saying, how do you know all these things? I think, well, Guru Maharaj, Gurudev Prabhupada. But I knelt down on the street in Calcutta and there was this dust like sand, but shiny. And it was just like the sand in Vrindavan. And I was just holding up and letting us. And I told him, I said, I know very little actually, but of what I've got from them, even a little from such a source. Your thinking is vast knowledge and infinite wisdom. And it is a drop of the infinite is infinite. So. But what was I saying? Oh, so why was I saying this? Related to Indra Dhumna, Gajendra Gorendra Prabhu ask that question that I know. Yeah. And after that you turn To Samskara. Oh, Samskar. Impressions. Impressions. Yeah. That's why I wanted to say that. So those born in that land, like what Gurudev said about one devotee, very nice Vaiava devotee, he said he was half made by his father, like even before he came because he grew up in a vaiava family and as so many of the disciples of Saraswati Thakur did. But what Avadut Maharaj and I sometimes consider is that that could also give you some ego, you know, such an auspicious birth. And you heard these things like Guru Maharaj's brother, when he heard Achyutananda Maharaj say he was the first Westerner to visit Japania, he went with Guru Maharaj Krishnaj Babaji Maharaj Jaja Maharaj. Guru Maharsh hadn't been there many years. And the family members of Guru Maharaj, they were astonished to see this Shaib, you know, white foreigner in the saffron dress. And not just in Navadib, but Hapania. I would say many people there had probably never seen a white person at that moment, up to that moment. So they were. And that he is promoting Mahaprabhu's Krishna conception was just more. They were just astonished. And one of them said, how did you. We are from here we have the Sanskar that we appeared out of this soil, right? A Sanskritian family. The ladies speak Sanskrit. And Guru Maharaj's family, as one of his aunties detecting some anti female sentiment and Guru Maharaj as a young precocious boy, why are you like that? And he said, oh, I've read some things in the scriptures. And she said, well, have you heard this? And then she quoted the Sanskrit that said women are to be seen as Lakshmigan, you know, from. As representatives of Lakshmi Devi, you know, in Bengal they call you and lucky that's they dropped s. It's Lakshmi. And they say lakhi. They're calling a woman Lakshmi. So she said, do you know that she quoted the Sanskrit And Guru Maharaj is regulated by hearing Sanskrit and Shastric representation. So he said, I had to readjust my thinking. He said, then from that day I came to see ladies as you know, extensions of Lakshmi Devi, which is so beautiful. And you know, his sister took initiation from him. You know what her name was? Rama. And I can still hear him. You could Guru Maharaj and you hear Guru Maharaj go, Rama. And then she'd go running up the stairs and very. And she looked like very similar to Srila Guru Maharaj and Very sweet Vaishnavi. So if you're born in that place, there could be some ego, understandably, that you've got something. And you can think, I've got something. But what we're sharing with one another, we're thinking we. Whatever it appears that we have, we know it was a gift because we didn't spring out of the soil with this particular conception, at least fully expressed. So we know it's a gift from Srila Prabhupada, Srila Sridharma, Srila Gurudev, Srila Govinda Maharaj. And we hope to carry that with us. So what I told him was that, yes, the Devatas, they're devotees, but they may not be Shuddha bhaktas, pure devotees. And we see this described by Sanatan Goswami and Briyad Bhagavatamritam, where he's telling the journey of Gopa Kumar through all these different planes. And analytically speaking, Indra Brahma, the representatives of karma, Misra bhakti means devotion with a mixture of karma Shiva. In this context, remember, there's bog Shiv tag, Shiv bhakta, shiv tag shiv Gyanamisra bhakti, some tens there. But for these Devatas, you see Indra Mohan. The when Indra is bewildered for the Govardhan Puja pastime, he's inundating, right? Because they stopped offering sacrifices to him. What's got into these people? Have they forgot so? But of course we will say, well, but it is Lila. And that's a very profound question. Because ultimately everything can be adjusted as Lila. Even the Jivas coming under the influence of Maya, and then the Lord and his devotees descending to liberate it can also be considered Lilah, as Bhaktived Thakur puts it in Jaiva Dharma. Someone says, why do we have to be in a particular kind of Lilah that has like, a lot of suffering in it? Couldn't we be in some other kind of pastimes? And that'll be the way, why like this and Bakshmi Otisanga. The answer given is, which pastime is free from suffering? Mother Yashoda, figuratively speaking, cried herself blind in separation from Krishna. Look at the anguish and suffering in the hearts of the Brajagopis, the cowherd boys in separation from Krishna, the Jamuna in separation from Krishna, the cows in separation from Krishna, everyone in separation from Krishna. So then there's quality of. There's a debilitating, binding suffering that comes as a reaction to illusory enjoyment. But then there's this other type of suffering that comes on account of genuine spiritual attachment and affection. Bhaktived Vinod Thakura in the Prema Pradeep says, actually, really it's Krishna Prem Krishna Prema Nitya Siddha Chadrakovo noi think really you have it. I remember Prabhupda and one of his purports in the Bhagavad Gita. It impressed me many years ago. How about 50 or 45? 45 to 50 in that range that stuck with me. He said, I'm paraphrasing this little. He said, our natural tendency of love of God is being pervertedly manifested as lust for matter that so Indra Mohan Brahma Vimohan Karma miya bhakti. He is also thinking, what's God under these gods and goddesses? Why are they worshiping this little boy? Vrindavan. Oh, Leela, Palestine. So then the beautiful Brahma falls at the feet of Krishna. And although he says, when it comes to your pastimes, my Lord, others may say they know about you. As far as I'm concerned, I have very little to say, right? Kim Bahukta Namay Prabhu John onto Eva John onto Kim Bahu. Others may say what I mean. And then what kind of all the beautiful Brahmastuti I've mentioned when I got to serve rla Prabhupada prasadam and answer his many questions when he asked me like what I was doing and I said, well, I'm doing different types of preaching, you know, I distribute books to the temples, you know, either ISKCON Press or the BBT warehouse and also go and preach to Indians. We had a program many Indians in the New York area. And Prabhup, he's like interested, you know. And I said, but Srila Prabhupada. I said, sometimes I'm preaching to them and they will say to me and I can't believe I'm like impersonating an Indian with prabhupada. But he has a sense of humor. And they'll say to me, oh, I know what is Ka. I am knowing what is Krishna. And Pharaoh had laughed and he had like a sweet ball in his hand, he laughed and he said, that is their disease, by the way. He says, that is their disease. That's Brahma stuti. It's in the prayers of Brahma. Everything that ever came out of Srila Prabhupada's mouth is scripture, but just in a natural, loving, flowing way. So Brahma is Saying others may say, I know what is Krishna but as far as I'm concerned, I know very little on this subject. But then the Brahmastuti comes out. Means the prayers of Brahma that if you learn them, all the aspects of Gaudiya Vaiavasam are there. If you just know these prayers, you can preach to everyone, anywhere at any time. But that it ends up glorifying Brahma, shining a spotlight on his devotion. Same with Indra. And what is Indra's conclusion? Dev Varshati Yajna Viplaba Rusha Bradrasa Siddharth Pala Pashu Sri Atma Saranam Utyika ut Baha Utpatyai Kam Utpatyek Liloch Chilendram Jata Vib Ram Gostram Mahindra Madhavit Priyan Indra Indro Govan. Indra says to Krishna after he realizes his divinity saying I am Indra, the King of Heaven. But you're the Indra Gava. Indra means king. They actually have names. That's the title. But when he said you're the Indra Gava, you're the king of the cows, the Lord of. And he's not just like he was saying, like is that a very nice thing to say? Like I'm the king of Heaven, you're the king of cows. Unless we understand these cows are divine. He's divine. So he's saying you are Indra Gava and then if you reverse that becomes Gava Indra he's saying you are Govinda. So all of that for Indra to indicate. It appears he's giving him the name Govinda but he's actually recognizing who is Govinda all along. From the get Go Venda East Varaparamakrishna Satchitananda Vigraha Anadir Adir Govinda Sarvakara. It's very interesting. Ishwara Paramakrishna. The Parameshwara, the Supreme Controller. The supreme is Ka Satchitananda Vigraha. And that Krishna, he's not impersonal, abstract, formless Satchit Ananda Vigraha. He has an eternal form that's full of Ananda. Ecstasy, love, affection, beauty. Satyam Shivam Sundaram and who is he? More specifically Anadir Adir Govinda. He's Govinda. Two things that as he takes care of the cows and gives them full nourishment and everything he does that for the senses. What do the senses like to do? Exercise their sensory function. We can say the eyes want to see beautiful things want to behold Beauty, but beauty that makes the heart feel something, not just wow. There was a yoga studio in Bangkok and they have this big ad, and it's called Planet Yoga. And their slide says California Wow. Like, that's what we're selling, folks. Give me some of that. California wow. I thought, this guy is brilliant, whoever he is. Because how do you define. I went there and I wasn't wowed. I mean, how do you prove that? But so that it's. No, we want to see the most beautiful thing. You know, whenever. Oh, look how beautiful. There was one, you know, famous lady, and they were interviewing people who watched her. And even women were saying, she's painfully beautiful. Like, she's so beautiful, it's like, painful to look at her. But like, in a sweet way. It's a sweet type of pain observing this type of beauty. And if you look, there are slokas like that about Krishna, about Srimati Radharani, about Mahprabhu saying, put gold in a painful position. That type of golden, right? So Govinda means the Lord of the. But what does that mean? Lord of the means he's the personification of what you could hope to see with your eyes and hear with your ears. The sound of his name, the sound of his flute. When we were saying recently that, you know, Krishna has nothing to do, I heard Prabhupada say that also 45 years ago, it was only like two weeks ago. I went, oh, Krishna has nothing to do yet. He's doing everything. But he plays the flute and has pastimes with his devotees. And then Balaram's his first other. Then Balaram quadruple expansion, second quadruple purush avatars, Guna avatars, Leela avatars, on and on and on. So that Krishna. And what is Rupaka Swami say? Oh, he's just playing the flute. River gal Swami said, runda nambu britas chamatkut kuti param kurbambuhukan Gopal. No, I'm thinking of another verse. Anyway, he's saying when that the sound of Rupa Goswami writes this song. Well, you say he's just playing the flute. What does it do saying the sound of that flute? It penetrates the eight layers of the universe. And you know, the clouds animated things are paralyzed. That's so beautiful. They stop moving. The animate become inanimate. And the inanimate start to animate. Rocks are melting. Munda Ambhu, which has tomato kurvam hustumburum, Tumburu means the leader of The Gandharvas. That means arguably the best singer in the universe and the best tune. Smith is saying, I've never heard anything music like this. This is unbelievable. Dhyana Rantaran, Sananda, Mukhan, Vishmapitam Vedasam. Yeah. So Vishmapita and the four Kumaras. Remember they're appearing as young boys, totally pure, that no one can break their meditation. Nothing distracts them ever. They're totally fixed, always. And hearing the sound of Krishna's flute, saying they can't concentrate, it's stolen their minds away. Vishmapidam, Vedas and Brahma is astonished. O Tsukya Bali bhi balim Aya and Bali Mahar. Because what it means, what it's doing is what Rupa Goswami is doing is the sound is going. It enters the penetrates the eight layers in the universe. Then it's going around the universe. So he has it. Now it's going to the bottom. Balimar, that's at the bottom as he did Brahma Gandhar, you know, he's doing different layers. Now it's going down the bottom. He's astonished. Bali Maharaj Bhogindramagurnayam and means Ananta Dev, upon whom all the universes are resting and the planets and everything. His heads are going. It's like he's intoxicated. So his heads are staggering with the intoxicating sound of the flute of Krishna. So when we say he's playing the flute, he's not doing. It's destroying everyone in the most beautiful way imaginable. Their senses are becoming destroyed by hearing the beauty of that sound. But in a good way. Govinda, so beautiful to see, to hear, to touch. We're saying the lotus feet of Netinanda Koti Chandra Sushant, more soothing than 10 million moons. Well, the taste Kaadharam Ritam, all prasadam is a result of coming in contact with the lips of Krishna. That's the secret ingredient according to Mahavrabh. And the aroma right back to the Kumar Tasyaravinda Nayana Sipadhara vinda Kinjalka Mishva Tulasi Makaranda Bayu Antargatas va vivarena Chikaratesham sang so Bryam aksharajusham API chitta tanvo. When they inhale the aroma of Ka's lotus feet mixed with the tulsi and saffron, their minds are stolen and they enter Vaikuntha just by the aroma emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord. So every Govinda is the total Sensual expression of divinity that actually our senses are incessantly seeking. But Sarvapdi vinir mutam tattvarottena nirmalam upadi. One meaning is substitute. We're substituting so many other things. Or as Prabhupada said, that natural Prem love for Krishna is being pervertedly manifested as a lust for matter. So that Govinda Brahma, oh Sanskar and the ego of devotees, I think has been expressed there. So but just to complete that Gajendra. So because of some offenses he had to take birth as an elephant. But now he's in this very dangerous situation. Thousand celestial years and the clutches of the crocodile. And Prabhupda mentions in the purport he remembered some slokas from his previous life. And so what I told the boy, I said where did he get those Guru vai? So that's covered. So he remembers them and he's praying to the Lord. And then the Lord Narayana comes on writing Garuda and rescues him. So in the poetry of Rla Rupa Goswami he says Gajapati tarana. What is that one? Paramananda Gorima. Oh, Swarupam Bibrano Jagatul. There's the Bibrano Jagatulyam Adwaita Dvaita Prapana Sri Vaso Parama Nanda Gaurima Harir Dino Dhari, Gajapati Kripo Kripoteka Sharma Sachetan Kame Dashore Pita Yashati Paramount Gajapati Dharana. That's in Guru Maharaja song. But it's on Rupa Goswami's poetry Gaja Pati Kripoteka that it's interesting. So Guru Maharaj said that means it's a reference to. Because Rupa Goswami is saying in this Svarupam Bibrano jagadattulam. And each thing Guru Maharaj says can be interpreted in two ways. So one means that the form of Mahprabhu is incomparable. There's nothing as beautiful as the Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the combination of Radha and Ka. But it also means Sroop Damadar position is incomparable. Swarup meaning Mahaprabhu's form or Swarupam Bibranut Jagadatuyim Adwaita Dvaita Advaita is his dearest purpose. Prapana srivas Paramananda Gorima means Paramananda puri. And then Harir Dinodari Gajapoti Kripot Sekha tarala, Ripa Goswami, saying I'm, you know, he is fallen. But he also mentions Gajapati. And Guru Maharaj said this can mean Gajendra or Gajapati Prata, Parudra Prada Maharaj. And interestingly in the Goragona Desha Dibika says that Indradumna appeared as Prataparudra Maharaj. So there's your Gajapati because gajapati also means elephant king. So he appears in Gore Leela as Prataparudra Maharaj and is also saved by the Lord. But here the prayers that he's singing are the Gopi Gita, Tavakatamritam Tapta Jivanam Kaviberi, Risham Kalma Sha' Avaham, Sravanamangalam Srimadam Bhuvi Granantite Bhuri Dajana and Mahaprabhu. Then he said buridha, Burida. Burida means yes. They're the real givers who tell us about Ka. They're the real welfare workers in this world, the real altruists, the real humanitarians, the real saviors who tell us about Ka. The nectar of his topics that will put an end to the sufferings of our material existence and forgetfulness, our relationship with Krishna and bring about divine remembrance. And also the same thing is the medicine for the hearts of the Brajagopis who are feeling the pangs of separation from Krishna. And the beginning of the 10th canto first chapter was going to describe the appearance of Krishna which by the way is the heart, the heart transaction, Vasudevan Devaki. Same thing for Jagannath, Misra and Satchimata. Now it says Nivratar Shayar Upagiya Baboshadattra Giyamana Baboshadatta Shrotra Manobi Ramat Kautamasloka Gunanavadat where he says, remember he's fasting for seven days water and solid fasting until death. And he tells Sukharnai, he said, I'm not thirsty or hungry because I'm drinking this nectar from you. You're telling me all these wonderful things, Krishna Katha and that's nourishing me. I'm not tired, I'm not hungry, I'm not thirsty, I'm feasting upon this substance. And he said, and how wonderful it is because oshud means medicine. And we know generally medicine, especially the kind they always said that's really good for you, always tastes the worst and you know, the so called bitter pill to swallow and he's saying, bhava, Bhava Oshadota. This is the medicine that cures bava rog, that means material existence. And Sanskrit, he's saying, but it's shotra manobhirama. Hearing it, mano abhiram. Abhiram means beautiful mano. It beautifies the mind. Your mind becomes beautiful just hearing about these things. The response of the mind to Krishna Katha is to beautify. And therefore you're drinking the medicine internally. So he said, this is nice. This medicine tastes so good, and it's the cure for material disease. So what was the question? It was two parts, right? Yes. I still disturbed. Why I'm still disturbed when things don't go the way I expect them to do to. And is it just my ego and forgetfulness? Of course, yeah. Because as much as we've heard, still we're holding out that things are going to go our way. You know, that like we're told, not a blade of grass moves without the will of God. And I noticed every time I see the grass blowing, you know, and this way, and I go, like, I didn't say you could do that. So I go, oh. And they're not listening to me because I'm not that person without my will that not a blade of grass. You know, there's somebody else who has that position. And it's described in the Gita Boktaram, yagya, tapasam, Sarvaloka, Maheshwaram boktar, the supreme enjoyer that still sticks in our craw a little bit. You know, we're sort of like, but what's in it for me? So if we just, we're the father for Krishna, we'll end up like really being ecstatic, right? You know, we'll taste ecstasy. And it's understandable to think that way. But then we hear the great devotees do not think that way. So there has to be some point where we stop thinking of this as, what do you call it? Something and reward. But there's something and reward. There's a word that comes before that, like sacrifice and reward or something. And what are the examples RPA Goswami gives? In other words, it's understandable and a lower position that we're thinking, what can we get from this? Or how much of my conception can I impose on the environment? Whereas the higher devotees are seeing the environment, that Krishna's friendly hand is behind the environment. So they're interpreting it as best they can in a positive light. The higher up they go, the more directly they See, Krishna's involvement. We can at least understand that theoretically. But Goswami gives the example of Daruka, Krishna's charioteer, and Srimati Radharani herself saying Daruka, his service is fanning one of his services besides driving the chariot. So he's fanning Krishna. And as we said, Krishna is inconceivably beautiful. You're sitting there fanning Krishna, and you get lost in his beauty and realize, and who am I? I'm the person who gets to sit here and do this. What did I like? How special he must be. He momentarily gets overwhelmed, which is understandable. You're standing next to the infinite, like we see men in this world, next to a beautiful woman. Sometimes they become awkward. He's standing next to the inconceivably beautiful Krishna and trying to. And then ecstasy comes to him. And one type is Stumba to become stunned statue like you can't move, so he can no longer fan. And what is his response as not to enjoy that moment. But he's singing, curse that ecstasy. Why did it have to come now and interfere with my seva? So you're like, that's unthinkable to us. But that's the example RPA Goswami is giving of what a devotee, how a real devotee responds. You know the Parshada, highest level, eternal associate of the Lord and R Mati Radharani, when she's crying ecstatic tears, it's blurring her eyes so she can't clearly see Krishna. And it's just driving her mad. And she's cursing the ecstasy because it flooded her eyes with tears and blurred the beautiful form of Krishna. Some of you have to think, what is Ka consciousness? But you think how beautiful that is. So we're told that the Mahabhagavata. And I'll preface this by saying everything like, wow, that's these great. Why would. Would we want anything less? We want to hear what the highest thing is. Next to that, next to that, to understand. Otherwise they wouldn't. If it was something that was never ever possible, it wouldn't be meant. Why mention it? But it's to show what the substantial devotees are like in that plane. What is the position of Mahabhgavata? To see Krishna everywhere and in everything. Well, what does everywhere mean? I think everywhere, like Gurudev and Guru Maharaj sometimes, because there was like manywhere and anywhere. And they'd go manywhere. Not everywhere, not anywhere, but manywhere. But here it says everywhere and in everything. Yeah, but I mean, what is everything really? I think it means everything everywhere and in everything. Oh, that's not possible. What about. Yes, even in that everywhere and in everything, either directly or indirectly. Read the Rmad Bhagavatam. It's in the second canto. Everything is either directly or indirectly. Ka, so called Chatu Shloki. Four nutshell slokas. As the Gita has four, the Bhagavatam has four. And that's one of the Bhagavatam slokas. Everything directly or indirectly, it has to be. Otherwise it would be something that existed independently of him, which is impossible. So hearing that there is such a plane and there are such devotees like Guru Maharaj told the sweet story of Gorkha Shorthas Babaji Maharaj. And remember the Avaduts, these type of Babaji, they're thought by ordinary people to be mad or polluted or whatever. So they're often abused by society. Even Sukhadev on his way to the assembly of Purikit Maharaj and the sages was being abused by children. They're making fun of him, throwing things at him. Then they see he's a 16 year old boy walking naked. They think he's mad. But when he walks in, the whole assembly rises and offers him the presidential seat. Oh, maybe we got that wrong. And they see just by his form that he's divine. That's in the Bhagavatam. How beautiful the body of Sukadeva Goswami was. And they just rose and they have big long beards, some of them. Who knows how old they are, you know, Yuga is thousands of years. And they offer the presidential seat to a 16 year old boy. What is their vision? Babaji Maharaj. They're throwing things at him, calling him names. And Guruma said, what does he say? He said, krishna, I know it is you behind us. You're moving their hands, throwing the thing, making them say all these things. It's you using them to insult me like this and abuse me. He said, but I know how to deal with you. So I will go to Maya Shoda and then she'll take care of you. So just to know that that kind of vision can be real, that it was real in Gorkha Shorthas Babaji Maharaj, not to imitate that, that would be mockery. We're told to imitate the Mahabhgavata you will go down. But still, to know that there is a plane where that sort of vision is real is something wonderful and aspirational. And Prabhupada's statement from long ago was he would say, you know, you have your plans, I have my plans, and Krishna has his plans. So. But Gurudev said something very beautiful at Open the installation of Radharaman Sundar Jiyu in Koikali. That's the name, Radharaman. Very beautiful deities there. And he said that trying to remember why. He said some things came up about what should be done or what does Krishna want. And I remember him speaking about how the will of the Vaiava is everything. Because we'll say he's always saying the wills of Ka. That was also one of his expressions. But this time he was saying the will of the Vaishnava. Because why Krishna is bhaktavatsala, he is in love with his devotees. He favors them, he has unconditional love and affection for them. So, and as Ripa Goswami tells us, and in the language of Guru Maharaj, when the infinite comes under the control of the finite, that's the sign of devotion. So it's true, it's the will of Krishna. But Krishna himself says, aham, bhakta puradinohiyasvantra evadvija. Although it's announced in the beginning of the Bhagavatam that I'm independent. Svarat janmadhyasyayetan vayadhi tiratas cha artesu abhiya svarat yasvantra evadvida sarubir bhakta hridaya bhaktar bhakta janapriya. He said, but in the presence of devotion, my devotee, it's as if I lose my independence. So Naratam Thakur advises, forget Bangla. When he said, asrai eloi bhajay tare Krishna nahi tyajay akarane asraiya loya. He's saying, take shelter of Krishna's devotee. Then you get Krishna automatically saying, Krishna, he's unpredictable, trying to deal with him directly. He said, but if you take shelter of his devotee, then automatically you get Ka. So what I mean by saying this is that the higher devotee, it's as if they can bend the will of Ka by the pull of their devotional hearts. So we want to come in connection with them through association and service and try and see how what is coming down to us from the service plane, how that can be implemented in the world and not confuse what we may want with that. It could be. But is it that we need to know? It's not that it can't be. It can be the same thing. But is it so RLA Guru Maharaj said we should not be overly confident and our own judgment or assessment of things. And that leads us to seek the counsel of superior servitors, senior devotees or he said, those whose opinions are reliable. We told Bhakti Vinod Thakur he's having visions of Mayapur. Still he approaches Jagannathas Babaji Maharaj for confirmation. Sanatana Goswami. What did we tell? Who was it? Jagged Ananda Pandit told him, Sanatan Goswami said, I came here to be with Mahprabhu thinking, you know, I will achieve the highest auspiciousness. And I'm getting just the opposite because he contacted some disease on the way. And Mahaprabhu is embracing him. And the diseased part of his body is going on the defiant form of Mahprabhu who said to me, he said, it's like Chatu Sam, like the mother and the baby, you know, I don't. I'm not offended by this. In fact, I love it. But it was too much for Sanatana Goswami approaches Jagged Ananda. He says, I'm thinking I should just go back to Vrinava. What do you think? Yeah, I think you should also go. This will simultaneously confirm and contradict what I just said. So he says, the Mahprabhu I consulted with Jagged Ananda and I'm going to be going. And he said, jagga, you know Jagadhan, he's just a boy and he dares instruct you. So Mahprabhu didn't like that that someone in lower position instructed the senior most Sanatana Goswami. But another point to observe is that what is the humility of Sanatana Goswami? He's arguably the guru of the six Goswamis, including Sri Rupa, although he considers himself a Rupa Nuga. But his humility allows him to approach someone junior to him and say, what do you think I should do? Why him? Because he is part of Mahprabhu serving group. But still the humility of Sanatana to someone and a subordinate and to take his advice. So then what should be our position? So sometimes we may get carried away with ideas we have, but it's best to and they may be good service related. Still we confer with other devotees to find out if they also concur that yes, this is good, this is the desired service. RLA Prabhupada in America, when he was feeling ill and had not achieved so much success yet wrote a letter to Srila Guru Maharaj saying like I'm thinking I should go. I feel like I'm maybe going to be leaving the world. I think I should go back to India. And Guru Maharaj wrote him a letter saying no Prabhupada, you know the word Prabhu Dattadesh means where Prabhu or Guru gives you to preach. He said I think Prabhupada Saraswati Thakur has given you that place. And Prabhupada said I take your order on my head means, you know, I'm accepting it as coming from Prabhupda himself that I should stay. So again his humility. He has pure visions and plans for implementing Ka Consciousness in America. But he is open to reading the environment when it's favorable for that or not and consulting with others. So we should do the same because we don't want our attempt, our service attempts to be ego driven then that disqualifies it from actually being service proper. Ado Arpita Paschat Kriyata Sridhar Swami and parsing the Shravanam Kirtanam Sloga Prahladmara said at the basis of all of this must be self giving, self sacrifice. And that means non assertion, not ego assertion, non assertive, non aggressive. That Saraswati Taiwar said is humility. Non aggressive, non assertive. Hare Krishna.
