---
type: post
lang: en
title: "About Nityananda - Balarama"
authors:
  - Bhakti Sudhir Goswami
date: "2012-02-05"
location: "Gupta Govardhan, Chiang Mai"
audio:
  file: en_2012-02-05_About_Nityananda_Balarama.mp3
  mahamandala: https://mahamandala.com/en/audios/362/download
duration: "00:56:03"
transcribers:
  - Nalina Sundari d.d.
slug: en-2012-02-05-about-nityananda-balarama
status: draft
license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
---

00:00:00

Singing songs about how happy my life is on the Volga (?) river. And there is a festival, and they have fast (?), and this girl was dressed in traditional Russian dress, and singing this song, like Jamuna, saying, “How happy I am, my life was (?) on the Volga river.” And it was like vrndavan that mood. Are you okay?
Devotee: Almost. And I’ve thirty seconds.
Goswami Maharaj: Right. If you cannot count in Australian, then the stuff has some kick (?). We know that Mahaprabhu, when he is Nimai Pandit, sometimes he is taking the mood of Nityananda Prabhu and sitting as though he is Balaram and telling him, “Give me your plough,” as Balaram’s weapon is the plough. Well, not weapon, he carries it (?), he can use it that way too. What are the two things? Or the (?) and the plough. So, Mahaprabhu takes the paraphernalia of Nityananda, and they are very happy to see that. And [laughs], and at one point he says, “Give me vine.” He (?) to be in the bhav of Balaram-Nityananda, “Give me vine.” And the devotees are just thinking, “What should we do?” Because Balaram is famous for drinking the varuni, some intoxicating type of beverage.

  00:02:08

We hear from Rupa Goswami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, that once Baladev in such a mood of intoxication, he told the Jamuna river, “Come here!” and she was afraid to approach him while he was intoxicated, so she was shrinking away. And with his plough Baladev started dragging the Earth close to the end (?) and Jamuna was coming forcefully that way. And Rupa Goswami says, offer some prayer like, “We pray that Baladev will be pleased with us, when he is in this particular mood.” He said, “Because I could in my mood right now my happiness is such, I could destroy all the universes and everyone in it, and Krsna wouldn’t be angry.” He’d be happy with me, because if Baladev did decide to do something like that, then everybody immediately becomes liberated. Saying, “Not that I will, but I could.”

  00:03:17

So, when Mahaprabhu start saying, “Give me vine!” Devotees are thinking, what to do. They take some Ganga-jal, water from the Ganges, and they give that to Mahaprabhu and that he is drinking and exhibiting his divine intoxicate mood. [He is okay? Just playing.] Nityananda Prabhu, he is playing as a child, like right now as we speak, Srila Avadhut Maharaj and Srila Acharya Maharaj, they are in Ekachakra, which is the birth place of Nityananda Prabhu, it’s also the birth place of Chaitanya Saraswat Math in one sense, because that’s where Srila Guru Maharaj prostrated before the, what do they call it? Place of birth, the house of birth, something like bandha-garhi-grha, something. Gopal, what is it called, means birth house, bandha-garbhi, garbha-bari, is it garbha-bari? Garbha-bari.
Gopal: Garbha-stan.
Goswami Maharaj: Right. Garbha-stan. Yes, I am thinking of the Guru Maharaja’s sloka. But so that’s where Guru Maharaj lied prostrated saying to Nityananda Prabhu, “You are the dhamesvara, means like the governor, of Navadwip.” The person who decides whether you get a visa or not.

  00:05:21

Many times Guru Maharaj would say, “Passport is insufficient.” It’s good to have a passport, we all know that, everybody here knows that. We don’t have even our Thai ambassador this evening, Krsnapriya Devi, but she is here with us in spirit. So, to get here you have to be given a visa, which means someone has to decide that it’s the interest of the land, that you’re trying to enter for you to come. You’ve already expressed your interest, that is well and good, but the representative of that land needs to say, “Yes, we believe it’s in the interest of our plane to give you a visa to enter. It’s alright.”

  00:06:20

So, Guru Maharaj his thinking is always very fine and perfect, before he moves (?) or does anything. So, he’s thinking to spend his final days in Navadwip-dham. Because it’s been said that Vrndavan is for the highest section of the liberated souls, only they can be given admission there. So, humbly Guru Maharaj thought, “But we’re told, the non-liberated, they’ll find their fortune in Navadwip.” So, humbly he approach Navadwip. But before going to Navadwip, this is again that refined thinking, “He thinks, Nityananda Prabhu is the dhamesvar, I must first get his permission, so, he goes to Ekachakra. And up to that time, we should also say, that Srila Gurur Maharaj was hesitating to accept any disciples. Like Srila Prabhupad’s sister, Pisima, Bhavatarini, she wanted connection with Guru Maharaj, she had first initiation from Prabhupad Saraswati Thakur, and wanted to take second initiation from Srila Guru Maharaj, but Guru Maharaj is humbly deferring, declining, and send her to Aprakrta Bhakti Saranga Goswami Maharaj.

  00:07:48

So, Guru Maharaj not initiating anyone up to that point even though people were asking. So, he went before Nityananda Prabhu, and prayed, “You’re patita-pavana,” it means, the savior of the most fallen. Sometimes Guru Maharaj will say, “Nityananda Prabhu’s mercy has the greatest disinfecting potency, like sometimes we need to disinfect something to clean some area, saying, “Nityananda Prabhu, this is the extreme disinfectant for the impure heart, the sinful, as we find in the pastimes of Jagai and Madhai, the two leading sinners of the day, were saved by the grace of Nityananda Prabhu. So, anyway, Guru Maharaj is lying there, saying, “You’re patita-pavana, please, five me shelter in Navadwip.” And Guru Maharaj said, in his heart he was filled with this inspiration from Nityananda Prabhu, hearing Nityananda’s saying, “But you do not, you’re hesitating to give shelter to the fallen.” Because he wouldn’t initiate. He said, “If you will give shelter to the fallen, then I’ll give you shelter there.” So, that and a few other things in Guru Mahraja’s mind convinced him that he would precede to which part of the Navadwip? What is called aparadh-bhajaner-path, where all the offenders were forgiven their offenses, and there modestly, humbly, you establish Sri Chaitanya Saraswt Math, and those who would come for his connection. We’re very fortunate, that Srila Guru Maharaj would give them the grace of Nityananda Prabhu.

  00:10:02

So, in that place, in Ekachakra, Nityananda Prabhu lived there for twelve years, his childhood pastimes, and one of his favourite things was to organize lila, play with the other boys of the village. So, he like to do Krsna-lila, Ram-lila, other pastimes and the older people they would, they’re all, we’re told, by the grace of Nityananda Prabhu, he prevented them from understanding totally who he is. So, they are thinking, he is this wonderful boy, that they all love and sometimes they are saying, “How  does he know so much about Krsna-lila?” He is Balaram, of Krsna and Balaram, (?). He is Balaram, he knows everything about Krsna-lila, but they are surprised, “When he organizes the other children the pastimes are so realistic.”  Sometimes from leafs he creates Kaliya, and they have the Kaliya pastime. And many things. But what’s giving particular note there, one thing is that how much love and affection everyone in the village had for Nityananda Prabhu, saying the mothers and fathers loved him more than their own children, and we know how much a parent loves their own child. But they had even more love and affection for him, and if they are holding him on the lap they didn’t want him to ever go. The boys who are playing with him, night would come, but no one wants to go home.

  00:11:55

So, once he’s thinking of the pastimes of the Ramayan. And there of course he plays the part of the Laksman, and this is of peculiar interest, that normally, Balaram is the elder brother of Krsna, like Ramanuja, name means Krsna, who is the younger brother of Rama. So, he is generally in that elder position, which means that his friendship, there is a little element of vatsalya rasa, which means concern, care, protection of someone who is younger. But in the Ram-lila, their positions are reversed, Laksman is the younger brother, and Ramachandra is the elder. So, when Ramachandra is banished, Laksman wants to protest that, and prevent that from happening, but Ramachandra gives the order to abide by his wish, and he has to follow that.

  00:13:08

So, Guru Maharaj said, as if like they discuss, as they do, different pastimes, we hear in Chaitanya Bhagavad, sometimes they gesture to one another, no one can understand the hand gestures of Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu, they’re talking a secret language, many things. So, once having a private conversation, Nityananda Prabhu is saying, “Those are not my favorite pastimes, because my heart flow is restricted to a certain level, I like when I am the elder brother, and I then can care for you and fully serve you.” Cause it mentioned in Chaitanya-charitamrta, says, ekala isvara krsna arsa brtya, in the Nityananda-mahima chapter, he’s saying, “Ekala Isvara Krsna, Krsna alone is the supreme controller, Svayam Bhagavan, ar so brtya, means everyone else is in the mood of a servant and interestingly enough that includes Balaram. So, Krsna’s first expansion, His other self Baladev, even though he is practically Krsna. Sometime they say, “What’s the difference?” Colour. Krsna’s Shyamasundar blackish, Baladev is showing the white complection, some very minor differences, in one sense, on a tattva-level, but Baladev, he wants to serve Krsna, he wants to serve Krsna fully. One of his names is Ananta. So, Ananta means unlimited. So, he wants to serve Krsna, he has an unlimited desire to serve Krsna, as well as an unlimited capacity to serve Krsna. So, he serves in extraordinary ways, that we might not think of imidiatly. Such as, like wherever Krsna’s sitting, the throne, he become the throne. What about Krsna’s clothes? They can’t be ordinary clothes. They are also made out the spiritual substance. They are chinmoy. So, Baladev is the garments of Krsna, the sacred thread of Krsna, the umbrella of Krsna, the umbrella. In his service he becomes everything imaginable to serve him. So, therefore, Ananta, unlimited. And it says, Ses, Ananta Ses. Ses means many things, one thing it means, the end. Means he understands that the end of all things is service to Krsna. So, Ananta Ses. In one of his forms, one of his bed (?) forms, is as the divine serpent. Ananta Ses with his thousands of heads, and we’re told sinse the beginning of time, before the beginning of time, that Ananta Ses is singing the glories of Krsna, of Mahaprabhu, Gauranga Mahaprabhu and he is not exhausted his pastimes. [Is there any problem with that? It won’t burn, right? It’s not hot? Okay.]

  00:17:02

So, when they were playing, this particular day, they’re palying Ram-lila, and Laksman at one point, who is he fighting? Indrajit, I believe. So, the weapon they are using is a lotus flower, someone boy shoots a lotus flower, and the lotus flower hits Nityananda Prabhu, but he is in the mood of Laksman, so he falls to the ground unconscious, as if dead. So all the boys start crying because it’s so realistic, then they call Hadai Pandit, his father, his mother, they come and everybody is crying, they don’t what to do, they can’t revive him, he’s in this, it’s really, a bhav, and ecstasy, so he is in his divine ecstasy of being Laksman in the Ramayan, and no one can bring him back to life. And they’ve completely lost their minds at the thought of being separated from him. But then they remember, one by one, some of the voice say, “Oh, he told us, if this happens there is a way we can revive him.” What was that? That we have to play out the pastimes of the Ramayan. So that means one boy will have to be Hanuman, he’ll have to go to the Ganda-mandana, mountain, and there is a particular herb there and bring that back and to revive him. But to do that, that boy will have encounter opposition along the way to fight the, so they start playing the pastimes, while his mother and father they are watching hopefully, and the boys are playing, and the Hanuman boy’s defeating the enemies, finally he goes to Ganda-mandana mountain, and we know Hanuman in the original he knows, this herb is located on this mountain top, but where it is exactly he doesn’t know. So, he is Hanuman, super servitor, he cuts the whole top of the mountain and we’ve seen in many places, Hanuman is flying and bringing the entire mountain, thinking like, “I figured I’ve got it covered (?)” It’s in there somewhere, I don’t know exactly. So, (?) if you can’t bring part of it, take the whole mountain. So, he returns with that and they take the imaginary medicine and put it before Nityananda playing Laksman, then gradually he’s revived and everyone is happy.

  00:19:53

But as great as their happiness was, some sannyasi came vising their house. And their custom in the Vedic culture entertaining of hosting the sannyasis, they always say, “Is there anything else that you would like?” They are giving some prasadam,  some place to stay. And that sannyasi told them, “I need an assistant. And your sun would be a good assistant.” This is the culture that we cannot properly understand or estimate, it’s also a divine pastime. So, Nityananda Prabhu’s father has to give Nityananda Prabhu by divine arrangement to this visiting sannyasi and he takes Nityananda with him. We’re told Hadai ocha (?), his father became like a stone in separation from Nityananda Prabhu. In Ekachakra they say, his tears filled the nearby pukur, pond, that much crying came from the broken heart in separation of Nityayanda Prabhu’s father. They say for three months he was like a statue unmoving, he was so devastated by that separation.

  00:21:35

But part of the back story is that Nityananda Prabhu in Ekachakra when he realized that Mahaprabhu was born, Nimai Pandit had appeared, He was waiting for him, we told, he started roaring loudly, like a lion like roar that was so thunderous like the local people they felt to the ground, they thought it was earthquake, the sky was falling, they didn’t know what has happened. But that was his, like we see sometimes when someone is so relived at gaining something very valuable, like a victory of some kind, they let out, they’re making an intense display of feelings. So, he was so happy to hear that Mahaprabhu had appeared, but still knew it was not time for them to rendezvous for their pastimes to intersect. So, when he went with that sannyasi, he ended up touring India all these holy places, going to the South of India, this place, that place. And many years went by, twenty years actually.

  00:23:06

But toward the end, when he was in Vrndavan, he found the house of Nanda Maharaj, where he and Krsna had their childhood pastimes. We’re told eh felt to the ground in ecstasy, crying and exhibiting ecstatic symptoms in remembrance of all of their pastimes there, even though externally those places were not excavated of totally visible. Mahaprabhu later gave his instruction to Rupa and Sanatan, to Goswamis. But also he went to many temples. And by his description, he said he would go to the temple and see it was all covered is if there is not Deity there, no Krsna. And the people would say, “Krsna? He is in Navadwip now. He is not on the altar here any more, He is went to Navadwip, He’s appeared there.” So, that gave him some indication, that it was time to rendezvous with Mahaprabhu. And around that time, Mahaprabhu is also having vision, dreams of Nityananda Prabhu, Balaram. Writing on his chariot furiously going towards Navadwip. So, he told his devotes to go searching Navadwip for this extraordinary personality. And no now could find him, they’ve searched everywhere, they talk to many people, no one had news where he is. Then Mahaprabhu told one day, “Come with me.” And he took them to the house of Nandan Acharya, where Guru Maharaj later told, Goswami Maharaj, Aprakrta Bhakti Saraga Goswami Maharaj, established a Math. So, that’s the Nanda bhavan of Nandan Acharya, and Mahaprabhu brought all the devotees there, and then he and Nityananda Prabhu meet for the first time.

  00:25:39

And Nityanada Prabhu he cannot believe the beauty of Mahaprabhu, how much Krsna who’s now radha-bhava-dyuti suvalitam naumi krsna svarupam, he is enriched with heart and halo of Radharani. As someone asked Guru Maharaj once, if Krsna he is described in the Brahma-samhita as achintya-guna-svarupam yamsyamsundaram achintya guna svarupam, inconceivably beautiful. How much beautiful? Kandarpa koti kamanitya visesa sobham, if ten million Cupids with their seductive charm, beauty personified as one, that would be an indication of his beauty. And he said, so then what about the beauty of Mahprabhu? And Guru Maharaj said in this way, “If Rupa Goswami in this particular analysis says of his innumerable qualities Krsna has sixty-four, that are prominent, and then Radharani amogst Her innumerable qualitites has twenty-five that are prominent, he says, what would be the outcome of the combination of these sixty-four qualities of Krsna and twenty-five qualities of Radharani. So, as inconceivably beautiful as Krsna is, Mahaprabhu is more so.

  00:27:11

So, Guru Maharaj writes in Prama-dhama-deva-stotram, koti-kami-murchi-tangri rupa rasa rangaram, svarna koti darpanabha deho varna gauravam, his body is like ten million brilliant mirrors made out of gold, if we made mirrors out of gold, ten million of them, that type of shining. Rupa Goswami says in Chaitanyastakam,

  00:27:38

raso dhama kamarbhuta madhura damojvala tanur jati nam otanksas tarani kara vidyoti…, hiranyanam laksmi varan…

  00:27:57

Rasodama kamarbudha, back to this, if ten million Cupids if full blown cupidity, it their full radiant Cupid-like stage, Cupid to the extreme, ten million of them, that’s rasodam, rasik expression. Rasodama kamarbudha, madhura, that sweetness, madhur ujvala, radiant beautiful with that type of seductive beauty and charm, this is a hint at the beauty and sweetness of Mahaprabhu, and earlier what Guru Maharaj said in this sloka, ten million Cuoids would faint to see the beauty of Mahprabhu.

  00:29:00

So, when Nityananda Prabhu sees the beauty of Mahaprabhu, he is dancing wildly, sometimes like galloping like a horse. Sometimes he just stops and starts laughing in divine ecstasy, hysterically, then at the other time he’s falling on the floor crying another time his body is shivering, shaking, hears are standing on the end, he’s running around like mad, devotees are trying to catch him, they can’t catch him, Mahaprabhu is trying to catch him, then he’ll stop start laughing again, and he can’t believe it. And then finally Mahaprabhu catches him and pulls him on his lap. And Gadadhar Pandit is thinking, “Oh, look Ananta Ses has been caught.” Who is normally a bed, anantasesai, is the bed. Saying, “Oh, he has been caught. And now Nimai Pandit he is the bed, and Anantases is resting on him.” It said his heart was smiling to see this. And then Nityananda finally, he is astonished to see Mahaprabhu, and he’s thinking, “Is this that Krsna we played in the yard of Nanda Maharaj, that Krsna who dances with the Vraja-gopis? Is t his really that Krsna?” So, Mahaprabhu told Srivas Thakur, “Sing something appropriate.” And Srivas Thakur started singing,

  00:30:48

barha pitam nata bara bapu kanayo…randran venu adhaya sudhaya purayan gopa vrnde vrndaranyam svapada raganam pravrsad gita kirti (?),

  00:31:09

It’s a description of Krsna and Balaram surrounded by the cowherd boys entering the Vrndavan forest in the morning, but it’s from the angle of vision of the Vraja-gopis, if we’re saying, “Who is seeing this?” Krsna and Balaram and the cowherd boys are who is being seen. So, who is seeing this, we can understand it’s Radharani and Her group, from Her veranda they are seeing this and saying, “Oh, Krsna with His peacock feather, how beautiful He looks, His curling hear, the vijayanti forest garland, and He looks like Natabara. Means in modern time means like  a movie star. How these movie stars, their every gesture is just perfect, they always smiling perfectly, they move perfectly, they are dressed perfectly. Krsna is the ultimate movie star. Natabara…randran venu adhara sudhaya purayan, saying the, and He is sounding the flute, we’re saying, there is an endless stream of nectar coming from the mouth of Krsna that’s entering the flute and then showering out the flute in the form of sound nectar. So, the liquid nectar enters the flute and comes out as a shower of sound nectar and everyone is regulated by that. It tells Radharani and the Vraja-gopis their necessity, Nanda and Yasoda there, the cowherd boys, everyone is regulated by the flute sound of Krsna. And then it says, vrndaranyam svapadam ramanam pravisad gita kirti, singing, dancing and they’re (?) or dancing upon the earth She is shivering in conjugal ecstasy in response. And when Nityananda hears that it brings about such an intense remembrance of Vrndavan that he loses consciousness and faints, he’s already on the lap of Nimai Pandit at that point.

  00:33:41

So, and there we’re told, that here usually the servitor defeats the Lord. But here the Lord, it’s a rare instance when Krsna is defeating His devotee. But is that devotee? It’s nonless than Baladev, Balaram, Nityananda Ram, Nityananda Prabhu. And Srila Saraswati Thakur makes a point about what he calls the sevya-vigraha and the sevak-vigraha, saying, “Krsna is the object of service,” like we told asraya igraha, “But asraya vigraha of the sevak-vigraha is personified as Baladev.” So, if you don’t worship the asraya, or the sevak vigraha, you’re not really worshipping the seva vigraha, you have no real capacity to do that. So, that Baladev covers all the rasas up to vatsalya and Madhura. Guru Maharaj has put it in the phrase, by saying, “Who serves Krsna best is who serves RAdharani best. Who serves Radharani best serves Krsna best.” Same principle here. Without Nitai, heno nitai bine bhai radha krsna paite nai, without focusing on the service of the lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu, radha krsna nitya lila, their pastimes their seva is fictitious, it’s insubstantial. Nitaer koruna habe braje radha krsna pabe, and in many places, especially in Chaitanya Bhagavad, Mahaprabhu is saying, “If someone doesn’t have love and affection for Nityananda Prabhu they cannot be my real devotee.” He is saying, “If someone has even a remote tinge of envy for him, they’ll never get my connection.”

  00:36:01

And, who was it? Someone came and was going to give dandavats to Mahaprabhu first and he stopped him and said, “No, you first give your dandavats to Nityananda Prabhu and then me.” And one day Mahaprabhu really he wanted to worship Nityananda Prabhu, find some excuse to worship him. Devotees always wondering about him little bit. He is told the avadhut. Avadhut means no rules, no regulations, no social, you can’t figure him out. [laughs]. Some of you are smiling. And understand, if Gurudev gives some name to someone it’s not an accident. And Gurudev told me once too, previously one man had a great love for Srila Gurudev, Srila Govinda Maharaj, he said, “You know, if your name wasn’t Govinda Maharaj, it could have been Avadhut Maharaj.” And he was very happy about that, he liked that very much. It was meant as a very high compliment. “If it wasn’t Govinda Maharaj, you could have been Avadhut Maharaj.” Really, he told me that once.

  00:37:29

So, how is he an Avadhut? Sometimes he come to the house of Srivas Thakur, they open the door, he is naked. And he is in the mood of a child. Aand Srivas Thakur’s wife is Malini, and suddenly her breast will fill with milk, and Nityananda Prabhu who is like seven foot six, means over two meters, he sits on her lap and starts sucking her breast out. And all the devotees are just, “Hare Krsna. Jai Nitai! Doyal Nitai!” And what Mahaprabhu is thinking, that’s what love and affection, “Oh, there is some who will think, ‘Oh, that’s bizarre,’ who don’t have so much faith.” So, once he took his kaupin, his underwear, and gave pieces of this underwear to everyone, and said, “If you put this on your head or wear as an amulet, you’ll get sense control.” You will. So, they realize dealing with him, Mahaprabhu said, “Oh, I want you to engage in Vyasa Puja, that’s coming up, so, it’ll be nice if you’ll do the Vyasa Puja.” Mahaprabhu was thinking this is the way that we will be able to worship Nitayananda Prabhu. Really, they were meant to worship Vyas, but  he’ll be the agent for worshiping Vyas. So, was it Srivas Thakur? They made the arrangemetns and interestingly, it just sounds so much like the Chaitanya Saraswat Math, Srivas Thakur says, “I’ll have to get one book.” Like we basically know how to do this, but we also need one book to refer to. So, they get all the garlands, paraphernalia together and so Srivas Thakur were saying, “And now the archak, you will take the garlands and worship Vyasadev.” He’s giving instructions to Nityananda Prabhu, and Nityanada Prabhu is like, takes the garland and starts muddering (?) some things, some things that no one can understand, they are inexplicable. And he is frozen (?). And Srivas Thakur says, “You’re Nityananda. He is hesitating to worship Vyasadev and like this is time. The auspicious time has come to worship Vyas, and Mahaprabhu (?) says, “Dear Nitai now is the time, you must give the garland to Vyas.” Nityananda takes the garland, puts on Mahaprabhu. [laughs]. And they are worshiping Mahaprabhu.

  00:41:00

Guru Maharaj told, “To not know the glories of Nityananda Prabhu is like not knowing who your mother is.”  That level. And he said, vidyakule ki koribe tar, Guru Maharaj said, in this line of the Narottam song it is an illusion to those who do not properly recognize Nitananda Prabhu like the three non bona-fide sons of Advaita Acharya, cause that means vidya kul, here that, they think they know so much Scripture of my family line is so great. Some of them thought that Nitananda is not necessary, we’re worshipers of Advaita. Things like that. So, it’s mentioned there by Narottam Thakur also in the Chaitanya Bhagavat, Vrndavan das Thakur who is his heart core associate and follower, he will say, cause really Chaitanya Bhagavad is the where you find extensive descriptions of the glories of Nityananda Prabhu. Sometimes will say, “After all this intrede  (?) I am telling you, imploring you to follow the lotus feet of Gaur-Nityananda, they’ll save you, they’ll rescue you, accept their mercy. He said, “After all this pleading, all this intrede (?), if you don’t take this mercy, then I want to kick your face in with my left foot.”

  00:42:53

And so some people would go like, “Oh! How can he say that? That’s not humble. That’s not humility.” Kaviraj Goswami says, jagai madhai hoite moiste papista puriche makite hoite muise lagista, I’m more sinful than Jagai and Madhai, if you hear my name, you’ll lose all your pious credits, if you vibrate my name, you’ll go to hell.” That’s humility of the vaisnava, and here Vrndavan das is saying, “If you don’t accept the lotus feet of Nityananda, Gaur-NItyananda, they (?) kick you face with my left foot, that’s even more insulting. And how will we respond? And Guru Maharaj said, Saraswati Thakur said, “Oh, in this way he has opened a new channel for the Lord’s Mercy.” How? And he said, “Like sometimes a child, their parents they have little children with them, especially in the West we’ve seen this too, sometimes they’re introducing or having conversation and then a little kid says something really offensive, or tries to kick somebody, and the parents they have to compensate for the misbehavior of the child and give themselves to that person. He said, so here, “If Nityananda Prabhu,” this is sort of the end of the line, as far as divine mercy comes unless you take, factor in Virachandra Prabhu, his son. So by Vrndavan das giving a kick then Gaur-Nityananda have to come and offer themselves to that person as compensation. So, Saraswati Thakur said, “In this way, he’s opened a new channel.”

  00:45:00

And we know so much love and affection Srila gurudev had for Nityananda Prabhu, we can talk about this, we can repeat things we’ve read, but I think, when I think of interacting with his divine grace, when he would talk about Nityananda Prabhu, there is so much love and affection in his words, in his feelings, his emotions. He would happily think about what Nityananda Prabhu would eat for breakfast. And once when we were at Math and some prasadam was being served, and he asked one devotee like, “Oh, how do you like this particular preparation?” And they sort of naively said, “Oh, I don’t like that one so much, I like some of the other ones better.” And Gurudev he was so hurt, he said, “That was the favorite preparation of Hadai Pandit, Nityananda Prabhu’s father.” Like his heart was pained by that kind of thing. And in his final days, few years back, when being discussed whether he would go for the opening of Ekachakra, the one festival, they were making arrangement to take him by helicopter. He’s showed this picture of Nityananda Prabhu from Nitai Bari, his house stair in Ekachkra, with the Deity of Nityananda is there. And form a distance I thought, “Oh, is it Mahaprabhu?” Like it looked a little like Mahaprabhu Bari. But he said, “This is Nityananda Prabhu. You will not see a more beaustiful Nityananda Prabhu than here.” And then as if my reaction wasn’t great enough he said, “Maharaj, I am telling you, you will not see a more beautiful Nityananda than you will see here. And you will go there.”

  00:47:19

And as Kesava Maharaj and others said he is a satya bhak (?), what he says will come true, so in fact we got to go there last year and see the beauty of the Deity in there. But the only our mixed feeling were that, when we came to the Chaitanya Saraswat Math as inaugurated by Srila Bhakti Nirmal Acharya Maharaj, and we saw Gaur and Nityananda, that darshan, cause Acharya Maharaj took us there the evening before the Maharaja’s to see if everything was alright and we were shocked at the beauty of Gaur and Nitai in Ekachakra. And we were also thinking, as Guru Maharaj sometimes told us, when some wonderful Hari-katha was going on, he would say, “Oh, on this moment, perhaps our Guru Maharaj and your Guru Maharaj, they are looking down upon this divine traksaction and showering some mercy and blessings.” So, we thought, when we saw the beauty. And I think those who were there, some of you were there, everyone was shocked to see how beautiful these Deities were and the beauty of their outfits and ornaments. They were wearing turbans. And they’re also, as per Gurudev’s order seven foot six (?), that size. So, we all felt I think that Srila Gurudev, Srila Guru Maharaj, the Guur varga, they were looking down and very happy at this.

  00:49:26

And I think of the local place here, “Grace extended.” That is our theme, grace extended, I like that very much. That’s the concept. Vistara. Sometimes Guru Maharaj would say, “Gaur and Nityananda started a business and Swami Maharaj took it to America.” [laughs]. Cause he’s always like the representative of Bengali (?), so he said, “They’ve started a business, he took it to America.” The rest his history (?). So, that’s the family business of the Achyuta-gotra is grace exended. And there is no more gracious extension than the lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu. Nitai pada kamala loti chandra susitala, told ten million moons, like sometimes it’s very hot, like in Thailand and India as well, like the moon will come and you can feel some kind of coolness coming from it, it’s a cooking, soothing to the soul, the body, mind, soul. But we’re told, how soothing are the lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu? Koti chandra susitala, as if ten million moons, what kind of cool would we feel from that? And relieve. So, we’re very fortunate to be able to remember him and his divine pastimes at this time.

  00:51:21

If we want to get a connection with Gauranga. Mahaprabhu told Nityananda Prabhu go to Bengal to preach, beacause as indicated by Swami Maharaj and Guru Maharaj, he said, “The Bengalis are hard nut to crack.” So, they needed the maximum strength dose, which means Nityananda Prabhu, he’s giving that assignment, but Mahaprabhu says, “Go, tell them about Krsna! Krsna-nam, everything Krsna, Krsna, Krsna.” And what does Nityananda Prabhu say? Bhaja-gauranga-kaha-gauranga laha gauranga nam, worship gauranga talk about Gauranga, take the name of Gauranga. What are we told was Sivananda Sen’s personal mantra to his ista-devata, (?) mantra, gaura anga. Who was it he told him one of the great devoteess that he was wondering. Do you recall who that was? Was it like Nrsimhananda Brahmachari. One of them. And Sivananda Sen, “I’m wondering did Mahaprabhu really (?)? I’ll just hide in the corner, and if he knows what my actual mantra is.” And they send to him, and go, “He wants to speak to you. Is there Sivananda Sen here?” They bring him in and he says, gaura anga, you don’t need to fear, you don’t need to hide it anymore. He realizes he is substantial. So, anyway, why?

  00:53:09

Because why is Nityananda Prabhu apparently violating Mahaprabhu’s order. Because he knows really what’s been expressed perfectly by Prabhodananda Saraswati Thakur, yatha yatha gaura padaravinde vindeta bhaktyam krta punya rasi…radha padam bhoja sudham bhurasi, that if we want a substantial connection with Krsna, with Radha Krsna, Radha Krsna nitya-lila, that divine abode those who are sukrti van, as in, krsna varanam tesa krsna sangopanga parsitam yadge sankirttana praye yajanti hi sumedhasa, refines theistic intellect, they’ll realize, the entrance into the Vrndavan is through the Navadwip, the entrance into the pastimes of Radha and Krsna at the lotus feet of gauranga Mahaprabhu. So, Nityananda promote that saying, “If bring them in connection with Gauranga then automatically they get a substantial connection with Radha-Govinda. Hare Krsna. Nityananda Prabhu avirbhav maha-mahotsava tithi ki jai!

  00:54:33

Manasa, can you sing like nitai pada kamala? It’s already been sung, but sing it one more time. Now is our evening, the moon edition. The moon shine edition to koti chandra susitala.

  00:55:01

And one last thing. Gurudev’s saying, Guru Maharaj got the mystic transmission of the Rupanuga-line from Saraswati Thakur, Gurudev said, everyone knows Guru Maharaj is rupa Goswami’s men, so, why is he always taking the name of Nityananda? Doyal Nitai, Doyal Nitai. Cause Guru Maharaj said, Krsna Consciousness is so high, so inconceivably wonderful and high, sometimes in discussing it maybe we didn’t espress something properly, maybe we committed some offense, “So, if I take the name of Nityananda and return to the foundation, then my position, I’ll be reinstated to my rightful position to lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu, so, I am always praying for the mercy of Nityananda Prabhu too to readjust myself, reposition myself, we know if we’re repositioned at the lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu how fortunate we are. Hare Krsna.
