---
type: post
lang: en
title: "Appearance Festival of Srila Bhakti Raksak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj"
authors:
  - Bhakti Sudhir Goswami
date: "2020-11-09"
audio:
  file: en_2020-11-09_Appearance_Festival_of_Srila_Bhakti_Raksak_Sridhar_Dev_Goswami_Maharaj.mp3
  youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUw0CLsm4to
duration: "01:26:10"
video:
  youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUw0CLsm4to
status: draft
slug: en-2020-11-09-appearance-festival-of-srila-bhakti-raksak-sridhar-dev-goswami-maharaj
image:
  desktop: en_2020-11-09_Appearance_Festival_of_Srila_Bhakti_Raksak_Sridhar_Dev_Goswami_Maharaj.jpg
  alt: "Srila Bhakti Raksak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj in his chair"
license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
---

In the room of His Divine Grace Om Vishnupad Srila Bhakti Rakhak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj, we came to know something about the glories. The glorious position of Srila Guru Maharaj as we told there. I found a letter in the ISKCON BBT archives where Prabhupada was telling a devotee. He said if you seek a shiksha guru you must go to someone who is actually qualified to be shiksha guru. He said and I can recommend to you the one, the most highly qualified of my godbrothers, and that is Bhakti Rakhak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj. In fact, I accept him as my shiksha guru. What to speak of the benefit that you can have. So this was astonishing for us to hear. In saying what to speak of you, I accept him as my shiksha guru. And we see the reciprocal love and affection and genuine mutual appreciation of Srila Prabhupada and Srila Guru Maharaj.
So now it has almost reached the point of being commonly acknowledged and expressed that Srila Prabhupada is a shaktavesh avatar. But you have to remember from whom did that declaration come. Who has the authority to make such a pronouncement, to declare someone an avatar, a shaktavesh avatar. And who would believe it. Who would take that seriously. That came from the lotus mouth of Srila Guru Maharaj. He’s the one who declared Srila Prabhupada a shaktavesh avatar. In a sense, even his own disciples didn’t have the audacity. And they’re not known for any shyness on this subject. They didn’t have the audacity to say that, nor the authority that it would be accepted as being a legitimate assessment. But Srila Guru Maharaj, when he said that, then everyone happily accepted that and embraced that.
Just as Srila Krishna Das Babaji Maharaj, he would go around the Sri Gaudiya Math and, in addition to the songs, the standard songs that we’re singing, he’s always singing songs of Guru Maharaj. And again, we may think of course, but that is not normal or usual that you’ll go everywhere and sing the songs of your godbrother that he’s composed or written. But again, happily embraced, accepted. And when Srila Guru Maharaj said to Babaji Maharaj, why are you singing my slokas and my songs everywhere, like Pranamami Sada Prabhupada Padam, Sujanarvuda Radhita, etc., Parajugam Jugadharma Durandara Patra, Barambaradayaka Dayaka Puja. He said because I consider them to be on the same level as Rupa Goswami. Again, that is an astonishing statement. It’s not that he could have said, oh, I find them very inspiring, I like them very much, and I find them inspiring. That would have been nice enough, saying what you write gives some inspiration to me. But he said, I find them to be of the same quality as what is given by Sri Rupa. That is extraordinary.
And if someone asked me to say, well, we know Krishna Das Babaji Maharaj, he’s a big fan of Srila Guru Maharaj, so he’s saying these things, but how far is it true. Then I say, in the Chaitanya Saraswati, about how sweet and beautiful is the divine form of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, it says, means ten million Cupids. And he’s saying Raso Dam, meaning full-blown cupidity. I’m repurposing that word, meaning the full radiance and seductive sweetness and charm. And then, so he said Raso, this shining beautiful sweet form. So he says like that, ten million Cupids, that type of draw and power. So then where’s Srila Guru Maharaj. So that’s the poem of Rupa Goswami. Any parallel if Babaji Maharaj says, I find it to be same, same, same but different as Rupa Goswami. Then Groomers Koti Ka Swanakoti Darpanaba De Havanagorabam Padma Parijata Banda Vanditanga Sorobam. When he says, saying his golden radiance is like ten million brilliant shining mirrors of gold. And he talks about the fragrance, aroma. Then he says Koti Kami Murchi Tangri Rupa Rasa Rangaram. That so Rupa Goswami said like ten million Cupids in terms of full-blown cupidity sweetness. Guru Maharaj says ten million Cupids will faint to see the beauty of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Hey Krishna Janava Devi, joining the Gore Qatar. And so then we see what Babaji Maharaj said rings true. But then we see how it’s also unique.
Guru Maharaj said about Srila Saraswati, what I liked about my Guru Maharaj is he was not vomiting what he heard from others but giving something fresh. So Srila Gurudev once compared Srila Guru Maharaj, his style of delivery, but meaning substance as well, in comparison to two other worshipable godbrothers who have much appreciation for Srila Guru Maharaj. So Gurudev said about this one godbrother, he said his style is like a waterfall, just very intense. And he said, but it’s not so clear exactly what’s being expressed, but a great level of intensity. He said there’s another godbrother, he said like a pond, very clear, very gentle. But not dynamic. And then he said, and what is Srila Guru Maharaj. He said like a fountain of nectar coming from the unknown quarter, giving something fresh at every moment. And he could say that to those godbrothers, and they would not take offense. They would be happy about that.
We know so Srila Swami Maharaj, he accepts Guru Maharaj as his shiksha guru. A Prakrita Bhakti Saranga Goswami Maharaj would always invite Srila Guru Maharaj to his Vyas Puja. And at the end of his Vyas Puja, all the donations and everything that was given to him, he would give to Guru Maharaj. And that’s highly unusual. And Madhava Maharaj, Srila Bhakti Dhoita Madhava Maharaj, would come and stay with Guru Maharaj like a month every year. And he used to say, he would say, you are deceiving the devotional public. And you think, well, is that a compliment, is that a nice thing to say. But what he meant was, everyone should hear you, they should be hearing from you. But you’ve concealed yourself in your math in Navadwip. But actually, we want to take you everywhere and let everyone hear your unparalleled Krishna-katha, glorification of Srimati Radharani and Mahaprabhu.
And this was noticed even in the beginning when he was a white-clad vanaprastha in Gaudiya Math. And so they have a preaching party, and you have like the one or two leading preachers, and he’s like the new devotee assistant. And they want to collect donations from some wealthy merchant in Kolkata. But he’s in the midst of Chandi puja, you know, shakti worship of the goddess. And so the people are saying that, oh, he can’t come and meet with you now, he has to wait for the Chandi puja to finish. And they’re reading from the Chandi book and everything. And the devotees, they’re perplexed, what to do. And Guru Maharaj says to that man, oh, you must save him from this. And he said, what. He said, let me speak to him. And he said, can’t you hear what they’re reading from the book. And he’s saying, what, what are they saying. And they say, well, one thing they’re saying is this must be conducted very briefly. It should not be a very extensive amount of time. But it should be conducted very briefly. And the person who’s reading the mantras, he cannot move his head to the left, he cannot move his head to the right, he must keep looking forward. And if he violates that, then there will be some inauspicious outcome. And he’s violating that, and he’s taking too much time. And then the man was like, oh, thank you for saving me. And then he gave a big donation. And he told the other devotees, he said about Guru Maharaj, he said, this man knows everything.
So he could see that, and even Srila Saraswati Thakur, he said once, Sridharam Sukhshent, Sridhar knows everything. Because of Guru Maharaj’s ability to extract the inner meaning of the scriptures and also apply that in any given situation. We know once one devotee was in the room of Srila Saraswati Thakur, and Srila Saraswati Thakur is expressing some appreciation for him and his service. And he came out and to another, the outer room, and Guru Maharaj is there and some other devotees. And he’s sharing, he said, well, Prabhupada was saying. And he’s telling them all the glorification that he was just given and how exclusive his position is. And Guru Maharaj quoted some Sanskrit in the corner. And then the others, they start to giggle, like those who know Sanskrit. And he’s going, what, what did he say, what did Sridhar Maharaj say. And he quoted the verse where it says from the Rasa-lila that each gopi thought that Krishna was hers and hers alone. So not only can he quote all these scriptures, but make it relevant to the circumstance in a very practical way.
So when Guru Maharaj was collecting and had to go to a government office, and this could only happen in India, they have some money set aside for religious institutions. And so when Guru Maharaj is coming basically just to pick up the check from that man and bring it back so they can construct a temple in the Madras Gaudiya Math in South India. And so, but when he arrives, they find the man who had agreed to that previously, he’s no longer in that service, he’s been replaced by another man. And that man tells him, like new administration. And he said, but one thing I want to tell you is that if there are any surplus funds, it won’t be used for making a math. If there are any surplus funds, it will be used in some humanitarian activity, like feeding the hungry, clothing the poor, shelter for the homeless. It’ll be used for that, it won’t be for these religious institutions. And Srila Guru Maharaj saw him inside himself and said, oh, what can I do. Srila Saraswati Thakur may be disappointed, I’m coming back empty-handed. So he’s praying, and he said internally he has a vision of Srila Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Thakur. And he’s praying to his Guru Maharaj for some inspiration to help him in this situation.
And the verse that comes to him is from the Rasa-lila section of the Bhagavatam. So we might think, well, how is that practical. This is a circumstance staring you in the face, it’s inescapable. And you’re coming with some sloka from the Rasa-lila, how is that practical. And Srila Guru Maharaj quoted the verse, says Vikriditam Veritam. And it’s talking about who is qualified to express these divine pastimes, under how they shall be heard, disciplic line from the qualified person, it’s a transaction of faith, those whose senses are undisturbed by the mundane and don’t even have a remote trace of mundane erotic tendency. So many things, but then there’s this line there, and it said, and what will it do. If you can create the circumstances where these things will be heard, these divine pastimes of Sri Sri Radha Krishna and Vraja gopis, what will be the result. Rid Rogam Enoti, that Rid Rogam, the heart disease which is at the root cause of material existence and the suffering of the people, that will be eliminated. And the hearts in its cured condition, in its healthy condition, this natural flow of love and affection will be released from the heart.
So he’s saying Rid Rogam, that’s heart disease. What does that mean, not in the biological external sense, but internally, consumerism. Just that now, as now in the modern world, what is behind all of these, the present masters of the internet. When all is said and done, they want to stimulate insatiable desire in us and just sell more and more mirages, illusions of attaining fulfillment or happiness by controlling, acquiring, and consuming things that are lower than ourselves. So that’s Rid Rogam, consumerism. And then Guru Maharaj gave these examples which were shocking to hear. And dramatically, and we don’t think of Srila Guru Maharaj in this way, but he is representing a particular position. So he said, when I was in the body of an elephant, I consumed jungles, and that hunger was not satisfied. And in the body of a stool-eating pig, I consumed hills of stool, and that hunger was not satisfied. So what can address the real hunger of the heart, what the heart is hankering for. Prati Anga Lage Kande Prati Angamor. What will satisfy every atom of every soul’s hankering is Krishna connection. And how do you get Krishna connection. By hearing about Krishna.
All these examples we hear mean that, and our own experience, not just from the scriptures, which is the most authoritative representation of this transaction. But in our own lives, they’ve been changed. They’re hearing about Krishna is a life-altering experience. And whatever our faults or lack of qualifications may be, we can’t deny that that is what has changed the trajectory of our lives is having the good fortune to hear about Krishna from his devotees. Those who do this, who give the gift of Hari-katha, of Krishna-katha, they’re the real humanitarians, altruists, welfare workers in this world. And when Mahaprabhu collapsed from exhaustion of dancing at the Rathayatra and enters the garden there, perhaps the Jagannath Balab garden, the others pushed forward Prataparudra Maharaj, not in the dress of a king, but in the dress of a humble Vaishnava. And so Mahaprabhu lying there, and he begins to massage his lotus feet. When he quotes this verse, and it’s from the Gopi Gita. And what are they telling us. It’s an amazing thing actually, because, well, that’s the Vraja gopis, what about us. They’re saying, no, all suffering comes from separation from Krishna. In their case, they can never forget Krishna for a moment. And so in a mystical, inverted way, they’re saying, oh, if we’d never heard about Krishna, how much better we would be. We can’t stop thinking about him or the sweet sound of his flute or his delicate lotus feet.
Over Radharani calling a meeting of the Vraja gopis, saying, I know what our problem is. And I’ve got a strategy to deal with that. What is it. The flute, the problem is the flute, the sweet sound of his flute. So what we need to do is steal the flute, and then our problems will be solved. And in a very sweet way, they’re dealing. But the Vraja gopis are going to say, so when our hearts are pained by separation from Krishna, what brings us relief. Hearing about Krishna, talking about Krishna. And then we say, but that’s them, what about us. Yes, we’re suffering on account of separation from Krishna, but instead of in remembrance, in forgetfulness. But the same cure, the same thing is the cure, to hear about Krishna, to talk about Krishna. Tupta Jeevanam means then that’ll put an end to the suffering. Jeevana means give life. Tapta you know. Shrimadam and then you’ll get so much wealth. Shrimadam and then Mangalam, beginning of all auspiciousness. And this Bhuvi Grananti Te Buridajna. When Prataparudra just sang that line, Mahaprabhu jumped up and said, yes, those who tell us about Krishna are our real friends, are really benevolent for everyone in the world. And he said, and it’s so valuable, I can’t repay you for that. So all I can do is hug you. So at long last, he achieved the embrace of Mahaprabhu.
So Guru Maharaj said, our center that we wish to establish will address the root cause of the suffering of everyone by establishing a center where you can hear about Krishna. And saying the glories of Krishna. And the man began to cry. Guru Maharaj got through to him. And then Guru Maharaj said, he turned and he said, Swamiji, I believe in God. And Guru Maharaj said, yes, your tears are the evidence of that. And then happily he gave that check so they could build the Madras math. And when Srila Guru Maharaj, the word would come to Srila Saraswati Thakur from Srila Bhakti Vinod Maharaj, telling Saraswati Thakur, whether it is with an ancient Sanskritian or a modern educated European or American, he’s saying, he can represent you perfectly to both groups. Because there’s some who can deal with the ancient Sanskritians, some who can have a modern approach. And saying he does it all. And Srila Ban Maharaj told when they were touring South India, and they came to Godavari, where the Ramananda Samvad was spoken. And Guru Maharaj said the Ramananda Samvad is the source of his ontological method. All of his wealth of interpretation comes from there. And on the banks of that Godavari river, where Ramananda Roy spoke his famous responses and teachings to Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Ban Maharaj said, who’d heard everyone, he said, what Guru Maharaj spoke there was the greatest lecture ever given of all time. And he went to Saraswati Thakur and said, Ramendra Sundar Prabhu, he should get sannyas from you.
And we know when Srila Guru Maharaj penned the Prapanna-jivanamritam. And just think about this, started off as five verses. So Gurudev published it, and they’re like Gory Darshan, thinking, oh, it’s a Panchakam, means a five-sloka prayer. Then Guru Maharaj wrote a few more. Gurudev said, oh, actually it’s an Astakam, eight. Then Dashakam, ten. Wada Shakum, twelve. And he’s saying, oh, so wonderful. Then, you know, 13, 14, 20, 30, 50. It’s like, it just keeps streaming. As Gurudev said, from the unknown quarter, something fresh coming at every moment. And he’s just astonished. Then it ended up being 70-72. Signed at one point Ramananda Das. Because after his extraordinary representation of the Ramananda Samvad, remember of which Mahaprabhu told Pradyumna Mishra, when Mahaprabhu says, Ami Krishna, like I don’t know Krishna-katha. If you want to hear it, you have to go to Ramananda. And how many Ramanandas are there. Ek Ramananda, only. With that implies a particular quality of representation. And Srila Saraswati Thakur recognized that unique, singular level of perfect representation and even showing some new color from Srila Guru Maharaj. So he changed his name from Ramendra Sundar to Ramananda Das. And then later to Bhakti Rakhak Sridhar Dev-Goswami.
And in the beginning, when I was forming a press and to publish and print the books of Srila Guru Maharaj, I was thinking how to represent this Bhakti Rakhak in the English language. And so I thought and I thought, oh, the Guardian of Devotion. And then told that to Srila Gurudev and Srila Guru Maharaj, I want to call the press that will publish your books the Guardian of Devotion Press, implying that Srila Guru Maharaj is in fact the guardian of devotion. And very happily Guru Maharaj and Gurudev accepted that name for the press. And Guru Maharaj, as we can sometimes refer to him as the Guardian of Devotion. So because that’s what he does amidst so many other things.
So Srila Saraswati recognized that unique ability in Srila Guru Maharaj to represent him. And we’re told when they have the press and Saraswati, you know, like he’ll go on a tour of the press and see what’s coming up in the next issue of like Harmonist magazine or various Gaudiya Math publications. And incidentally, we’re also told sometimes when he’s doing that, this is the level of Saraswati Thakur. He’ll see an excerpt from Chaitanya Bhagwat and go into a deep state of ecstasy. Like his hairs will start standing on his body, trembling. And he’s trying his best to conceal and suppress these ecstatic symptoms. But different devotees, awakened to a particular level of spiritual realization and devotion, could see that just in his touring the press. And seeing, here’s Chaitanya Bhagwat. So then he sees this verse that says, you know, Sri Goranga Matam Swarupa Viditam Rupa Agra Jain Adritam, Rupadjee Pariveishitam. And glorification of Srila Bhaktivinoda, the Bhaktivinoda Hadassah, ten prayers in glorification on the separation from Bhaktivinoda Thakur. And reading that one, they’re all beautiful, but reading this particular sloka, Srila Saraswati Thakur says, who wrote this. And see how beautiful it is. He’s just, this is about recognizing divine substance and personality on a pure assessment level of spiritual substance that will reveal identity.
So he says, who has written this. And one of the Maharaj there says, oh, Sridhara Maharaj. And that’s when Saraswati says, oh, Sridhara Maharaj has not written this. They’re like, what. Yeah, he’s saying, Bhakti Vinod Thakur has written this through him. It’s that perfect. And he’s saying, oh, now I am happy that what I came to give. Remember what does Saraswati Thakur come to give. He’s descended into this world, being irresistibly drawn in attraction, captured by the wealth from the melted heart of Bhaktivinoda Thakur. That’s why he descended here. And he wants to give that to others. So he’s saying, oh, now because Guru Maharaj in this prayer he’s saying that, oh, Bhaktivinoda Thakur, this is your gift to the world, the reason Mahaprabhu came down. That is the internal reason for his descent is known only fully through Damodar. And that is worshipped by Sanatan Goswami Prabhu. And being expanded and extended by Srila Rupa Goswami, Rupadjee Pariveishitam. Their extensive writing, so many literatures and extending that to others. And Raagu Gunai Ashwaditam. And Raghunath Das is tasting that with Krishnadas. And they’re extending it to others by their tasting. It’s actually becoming enhanced. Unlike mundane substance, someone tastes that, they’re extracting the taste, it becomes tasteless. This, by their relishing, is becoming even more tasteful. And Jiva Goswami is protecting that, like Rakhak, like Saraswati Thakur as well. And what Jiva De Abu Rakshita, Suka Shiva Brahma Uddhava. They’re all aspiring for a drop of this divine substance.
And just see Guru Maharaj’s ability to properly and in a worshipable, respectful way assess each one of these divine personalities and express and recognize and worship what is their gift, what each is giving. Not some general idea, but specifically what their contribution is. And then what does he say. So then what is it that Suka, Shiva, Brahma, Uddhava want to have a drop of. Sri Radha Pada Sevan Amritam. Oh, that is your gift, Sri Radha Pada Sevan, the nectarine service of the holy lotus feet of Srimati Radharani. So Saraswati was saying, that’s what I’ve come to give. And here’s a man who’s received it. And now I’m satisfied that although I may and will leave this world, at least one man remains behind who will be able to fully and perfectly represent me and the gift of Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakur and the Rupa-nuga line.
And then, 24 hours before his departure from this world, he called Srila Guru Maharaj, all the Gaudiya Math devotees there, the luminaries of Sri Gaudiya Math. And although Jiva Maharaj had been singing up to that point daily for the last three months of Srila Saraswati Thakur’s life, he is singing Sri Rupa Manjari Pada every day and other songs. But he was singing that. So that underscores that this is the significance of this particular event. So everything’s been going a particular way up to this point. Now it’s 24 hours before the departure of Srila Saraswati. And he called Srila Guru Maharaj to his disappearance bed and said, I want to hear the song Sri Rupa Manjari Pada from your lips. And Guru Maharaj, as in his own words, backward pushing man, hesitating to come forward, shy, non-self-asserting. So Kunzu Babu, Bhakti Vilal Tamar’s, at the time the manager of Sri Gaudiya Math, told Srila Bhakti Promote Puri Maharaj, using because he is a known excellent kirtaniya. And so he began singing. And then Saraswati Thakur stops him from singing, said, no, I don’t want to hear the sweet tune. I want to hear from the lips of Sridhara. In other words, who’s, as Puri Maharaj himself would say later, Rupa-nuga-dhara, who’s carrying the current of Srila Rupa Goswami. And he said, we witnessed, and this, a mystic power transmission of the Rupa-nuga line from Srila Saraswati Thakur to Om Vishnupad Srila Bhakti Rakhak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj.
And then Guru Maharaj sang Sri Rupa Manjari. And then, when so, I’d say your godbrothers, Srila Puri Maharaj, he was there. And he said, what we saw was a mystic power transmission of the Rupa-nuga line. And Guru Maharaj said, yes, my godbrothers say. And at that moment, I was given entrance into the group of Sri Rupa Manjari. And he said, but I rather like to say, posted at the gate, you know, like the gatekeeper. He said, and who will decide. We might, you know, Guru, they will say, no, Guru Maharaj is inside. And we worship that. But Guru Maharaj is deflecting, showing his vision of humility. But at the same time, what is the job of the gatekeeper. We know the gatekeeper can go in at any time. And actually, but what is their job. He said, and these are his words, he said, to decide who will enter and who will not. And that, when Guru Maharaj, we’re all sort of like leaning forward. And Guru Maharaj said, and I’m not allowing everyone and anyone. And we don’t want, like, you know, back off. But who’s one such person that he gave entrance to. Om Vishnupad Srila Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-Goswami.
But so Guru Maharaj said like that, they’re saying, I was given, I think rather posted to see who will enter and who shall not. So in so many ways, the glories of Srila Guru Maharaj are there. And we know in 1941, Srila Swami Maharaj’s sister, Baba Tarini Didi, she had first initiation from Srila Bhaktisiddhanta, wanted to take second initiation from Srila Guru Maharaj. But again, he was hesitating, Guru Maharaj very thoughtfully, carefully considering how he shall move. You know, everything there has to be internal, you know, a scanning of sadhu, shastra, guru, Vaishnava, and internal atma-samiksa, self-analysis before he feels the, when he says, wait and see which way the divine will move next. All things are not meant to please me. Someone, I’m going to call on you in a second. And so he was hesitating to do that. But he thought, well, Goswami Maharaj had ritvik authority in the lifetime of Saraswati, go to him. So she took second initiation from Goswami Maharaj. But she paid for the printing of Prapanna-jivanamritam in 1941. But if we think, like, oh, he did that, but remember then, Guru Maharaj’s Gita, which later becomes Hidden Treasure. The point I’m making, it was not like Guru Maharaj had some realizations up to 1941 and then shared those over the next 40 years. No, after that came the Prapanna-jivanamritam, those 70 slokas. Subjective Evolution of Consciousness, Search for Sri Krishna: Reality the Beautiful, Sri Guru and His Grace, Golden Volcano of Divine Love. Again, a unique, no one had called Mahaprabhu the golden volcano. No one gave this comparison, what, like a volcanic eruption. And the lava coming from the heart of Radharani, expressed by Mahaprabhu, that lava-like burning and volcanic eruption, that sort of intensity. All these things from Guru Maharaj, you know, Loving Search for the Lost Servant. This last book that we published from, you know, Subjective Evolution of Consciousness. You won’t find that anywhere. There is no Sanskrit equivalent of the subjective evolution of consciousness. There’s actually no equivalent in any other language. It did not exist in English till it came from the lotus mouth of Srila Guru Maharaj. Again, original and fresh. And an atom bomb to Darwinian objective evolution.
So still, and I’ve mentioned sometimes, Srila Guru Maharaj, with child-like delight and wonder, would say to me, and this was in the 80s, he’d say, oh, this just came to me the other day. So new things coming always from Srila Guru Maharaj. And I’ll just conclude with this. When he thought he was going to leave the world, he said, I face a dilemma. I mean, what is that. He’s going to meditate on Mahaprabhu or Krishna, you know, Gaur-lila or Krishna-lila. And I don’t think I need, if there’s any suspense in what the answer was, it was Gaur-lila. And then Guru Maharaj said, and then my life extended for preaching. And then in his final days, Dai Nitai, Dai Nitai. And taking Mahaprabhu on parikrama of Gaur-mandal. So Srila Guru Maharaj had the certificate from Srila Saraswati that he’s carrying the current of Bhaktivinoda Thakur and the Rupa-nuga dhara. He transferred that full wealth to Srila Bhakti Sundar Govinda Dev-Goswami Maharaj. He had this unparalleled appreciation from Srila Prabhupada, AC Bhaktivedanta Swami. And all the godbrothers, Madhava Maharaj, Ban Maharaj, Puri Maharaj, all the Gaudiya Math luminaries, and Krishna Das Babaji Maharaj. And I think Guru Maharaj could have only appeared in this month, the month of Srimati Radharani. And Srila, of whom Srila Guru Maharaj said, when I think of Radharani, I lose my existence.
And one last thing, when people would say, like, what is the difference between Sri Chaitanya Saraswat and any other Krishna conscious institution. We could say, you know, in a nutshell, you know, primary education, secondary education. But when Srila Guru Maharaj was pressed like this, his answer was, he in one instance told me to carry a chair off of his veranda over on top of the Nat Mandir. And I was surprised to see Guru Maharaj walk on that little walkway, you ever see, above that links the his veranda to the mandir. And he told me to put a chair over there. And I brought that man who was one of the leaders of this country, saying, alright, now he’s going to tell me or demonstrate to me what is the existence. And what is Srila Guru Maharaj. This is his own way of dealing with it. You know, Gayatri Muralista Kirtana Dhanam Radha Padam. He showed how he extracted Radha Dasyam from the Gayatri mantra. You know, Art Oyam Brahmasutranam, Bharathartha Vineyarnaya Gayatri Basyarupo. Showing what is the Bhagavatam take. It’s going to present Krishna conception. And what is substantial Krishna conception achieved at the holy lotus feet of Radharani. When you don’t get any superior quantity and quality of Krishna conception than through her. So he’s saying, if that is, if the Bhagavatam is the natural commentary on the Gayatri, then what is the Gayatri about. Radha Dasyam. What is the flute song of Krishna about. Like Gurudev would say, what is Krishna’s fluting matter, Gayatri Muralist. So it’s by through Srila Guru Maharaj that this marvelous transformation took place where Krishna-centered and then marvelously the shift went into Prabhuya from Prabhu to Prabhupriya, meaning Srimati Radharani.
So once you come in connection with Srila Guru Maharaj, you must come in connection with the holy lotus feet and service of Srimati Radharani. And as personified by Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And the last thing, and then you’ll speak. Maharaj said to me, so of the books that we’ve published, which is your favorite. And then I thought, like, you know, is this a trick question. Like, I don’t want to answer wrong. So I was like, um, uh, you know. And Guru Maharaj like couldn’t wait for me to answer. And then, like a blushing bride, Guru Maharaj, he said, Golden Volcano. Mahaprabhu, always relishing the pastimes and petition and position of Sri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. I’ll try to be short by consistent. Because it says in the Bhagavatam, the fruit tasted by a parrot will relish more sweetness.
So when we say Krishna consciousness as a Christian, as a fruit of Vedic tree. But really, when is that taster coming. When it’s been tasted by some connoisseur, someone who has full appreciation of the substance. And we can say, oh, there’s so many sages, and there’s so many riches, and there’s so many munis. Yeah, as Guru Maharaj said, rishi, muni, sages, they all trying to worship Mahaprabhu. But when we say who’s the real connoisseur, we can say it’s Krishna himself. But as we said, Guru Maharaj, Krishna cannot taste himself. He needs to have a particular position, a particular point of view. As we say, angle of the camera, angle of the perspective. And that is, you know, could be a Radharani or it could be Baladev. But as we know in Madhurya rasa, that is the superior taste. So then Guru Maharaj, so he’s defining that extreme spiritual taste which is coming from Mahaprabhu within a very, very small circle of not only liberated souls but the souls that can provide that service of relishing that.
And if we can carefully, with deep respect, observe that group, we’ll see Haridas Thakur, destined. And Guru Maharaj is giving revelation, his Prapanna-jivanamritam. Because he says, one who cannot purely be accepted by Holy Name and himself accept Holy Name can be saved by surrender. So that is Haridas Thakur, who never certain of his own position. But even in this condition, he preferred to be destined from, like, he’s not like, oh, what are they talking about, let me. He, very respectful distance. Yes, he’s very gently observing this and realizing, what is that I’m trying to get in Krishnam, that is fully expressed by that Mahaprabhu. But I’m not quite sure if I can step into this environment because I don’t consider myself qualified. So it’s a very humble approach. Consider, you know, Saraswati would call him Brahma Haridas. And do you think, while Brahma’s running the universe, what happened. Then Madhvacharya is explaining, he said, when it comes into like Yudhishthira, Arjuna, or some great personalities, the gods are extending their aves into that personality. It’s not that Brahma does not exist. But it’s basically his own self, he might keep a copy of himself and a spiritual to run around the universe. But really, his inner self has been entered in this personality. And he’s enjoying and relishing something that he could not even achieve in his own direct connection with Krishna. So think of this idea, even achieving something directly with Krishna, you cannot really taste and relish this without Mahaprabhu.
Then ontologically, we can say Prabhupada, he’s a Krishna’s giver. Like, he came to the Western world, as Goswamis described yesterday. And technically, you know, with four dollars in a pocket, reveal God to the Western world. And when we say Western world, we say deep in pressure, impression, Judaica, Christian conception, deep ignorance for thousands of years, accepting religion that technically is nothing but just social, material, political way to control people. Of course, in any religion, you’ll find some saints who’s leading towards, they’re saying, oh, love of God, that’s what we should lead for. But that’s not like a general approach. It’s not like love of God is being elaborately practiced and devotional service and the form of God. None of it has been given actually to the Western world. So when Prabhupada came, now Marupa, Guna, Lila, everything has been established. And it resonates with the heart of the most fortunate souls. It wasn’t like, oh, now that we know God is Krishna, everybody jump on that. It wasn’t the jump. But that was the base necessarily to establish what is the process, which is described by Rupa Goswami.
So that we understand, without Mahaprabhu, Krishna’s unaccessible. It even says in Bhagavatam, another scripture. So those who will worship Krishna but will deny Mahaprabhu are should be considered as demons. Because their worship is not a true worship. We can’t say the true followers. Because, Jnanam Karmach, if you’re not accepting, if you’re not technically accepting, you know, those who are the world of Krishna, his relatives, his devotees. And so what to speak about Radharani and Mahaprabhu himself. You have to accept Mahaprabhu. So Guru Maharaj is Mahaprabhu giver. His ontological presentation of Mahaprabhu, he is actually revealing how can you get to Krishna. And not only he’s revealing that, he’s fully himself observing that.
And you know, as we should also praise you, Govinda Maharaj, who’s been trying to assist him all his conscious life in order to create this unique environment around Guru Maharaj. Because if you say Prabhupada went all over the world and Govinda Maharaj went all over the world, then somebody may say, well, what is the Guru Maharaj. Isn’t like investment in this. Is he just a sage sitting on the roof of his temple and writing few slokas that we cannot even understand and appreciate, or is it something more. So then why the question has come. Why the group of Goswami’s books are forbidden, or Raghunath Das Goswami’s books are forbidden. I mean, certain reveals the higher ones. Because they’re not meant to please neophytes. Neophytes, they’re meant to please Krishna himself and Siddha and those who have appreciation at that level. So without that ideals of Rupa Goswami, we cannot claim that our sampradaya has deeper exchange on spiritual level and has deeper revelation which any other sampradaya concludes, the Madhva sampradaya, which is so great. So as Guru Maharaj said, the higher idea always will observe the lower idea. That’s how it works. The higher idea comes and absorbs.
So that is what we can see, that those who had some fortune on secretive towards Krishna consciousness were totally observant to Guru Maharaj’s way of taking them deeper, further. And by Srila Govinda Maharaj, mercifully, another group being established besides some connoisseurs. As we can say, who are there, like few people in the world, technically speaking. You know, someone like Pusta Krishna, with his academic skills, but he could appreciate Guru Maharaj and Mahaprabhu. But not every guru could. Whether it’s Saraswati Thakur’s disciples did. So we can say, it’s not just a circle of newly recruited Western section. So it was as good as more, the higher section of the math gurus, they appreciated it. So Goswamis is giving proper input. So we can’t challenge or we can’t consider, oh, if Western people could not appreciate Srila Guru Maharaj, then his mission is failure. No, we can’t say that. What we can say, Saraswati Thakur himself, he is liberated, you know, associates, including Krishna Das Kaviraj Goswami, Jiva Maharaj, Puri Maharaj, all of them actually. Marv Maharaj, all of them.
Just to conclude this thing, so we can understand that not only Guru Maharaj is giver of Mahaprabhu, proper understanding of Mahaprabhu. Because I believe without Guru Maharaj, you can’t properly understand Mahaprabhu. I want to speak about devotion, like how can you understand devotion without Prapanna-jivanamritam. Because it’s all based on surrender. Some people think, oh, I got the beads, and Kumar said, like, you can’t get to Krishnan. And only you can only overcome your inability of chanting Krishna through surrender. That was like a shocking thing to call his collection of songs. And Guru Maharaj wrote like commentaries of Sharanagati of Bhaktivinoda and also giving his own version of Sharanagati as Prapanna-jivanamritam. So as we can say, one of the Gaudiya Math brothers, a senior one, when they asked him, so how do we understand Prapanna-jivanamritam. He said, if you put this book on a scale of all other scriptures, you know, just like a scale, this book will weigh them all. Because it’s an extract of all scriptural statements are leading you towards unconditional surrender. So Guru Maharaj, that will give you everything.
Guru Maharaj, instead of like, well, let me give you the whole eighteen Puranas and Vedas and Tantras and the Pancharatras, let me summarize everything. Because he knew that that was like Vedavyasa’s work. So Guru Maharaj wants to summarize what Vedavyasa is giving by desire to give his own Bhagavad Gita, which is like from an interesting point. Because Bhaktivedanta was giving like Bhagavatam Kaviraj, a thousand verses. But Guru Maharaj would say, well, it would be more practical in a very circle of Mahaprabhu, where they would describe things. Whether they would talk from Bhagavatam, would they be speaking certain slokas of Bhagavatam, like what would be, they’d be talking atomic part, you know, who’s the Pancha Nagas. Obviously, all this knowledge is great knowledge. But Mahaprabhu would pick something, you know, in Swarup Damodar, and they would pick something very, very, very different Bhagavatam that would common people know. Then Guru Maharaj has had this quality and ability. And I believe, since his blessing of revealing that Bhagavatam treasure is still there, maybe, you know, someone like you, Maharaj, can do this in the future and represent fully and to continue his work.
In other words, sometimes in the lectures of our preachers, we see Guru Maharaj’s line of thought being continued. You know, Guru Maharaj’s mercy and heart being continued by Srila Govinda Maharaj. And we all got accepted, not because we qualified, just because we are, we got accepted because Srila Govinda Maharaj wants to serve Guru Maharaj, he accepted us. So we’ve been accepted under one condition. You may not qualify, but if you stick around long enough around this idea, eventually one day, there might be a little taste will come to you. And then you’ll be able to value it. It’s just like when a baby is born, you know, in a wealthy or educated family. And he doesn’t really value his family environment. But then relatives will say, what’s the hope for him. The same, maybe one day he has to, the inherited wealth will come to him. He just has to remain alive.
So anyway, I mean, I’m not a big speaker on any substance when it comes to Guru Maharaj. I know it’s a very specific way we should behave and speak. We can’t possibly go wrong, you know, Guru Maharaj would not allow that. And Govinda Maharaj would not be satisfied. But I think today our gurus are satisfied because we heard very systematic, clear representation from Srila Goswami Maharaj. You know, I throw a few drops. I see Bhakti Lalita, Shimati Bhakti. One thing you said that makes me think too is two things. One about Srila Govinda Maharaj, Srila Gurudev. So he, remember, this is also Bir Chandra Prabhu’s appearance date.
So, in short, we’re told, you know, if you, how do you get to Mahaprabhu, but by the grace of Nityananda Prabhu. So he’s the creeper avatar. Like, there’s so many avatars, what’s he. The avatar of mercy. So if you’re unfit, and we’re unfit. So Nityananda Prabhu will bring you to Mahaprabhu, who gives you Radha-Govinda. That’s the system. But it’s hard to imagine and seems inconceivable who could be more merciful than Nityananda Prabhu. We’re told Bir Chandra Prabhu. Because there are certain people who seemed really hopeless or beyond saving, he could save them. So Bir Chandra Prabhu, we’re told, somehow inconceivably is more merciful than Nityananda Prabhu. And that place goes, you know, Echo Chakra, also goes by, you know, Chandrapur, you know, in recognition of that.
But then, so Srila Govinda Maharaj is always like knowing everything, like you say, perfectly. And how to give the perfect type of glorification. And so what. And so Guru Maharaj is saying, you, if you know one side of Guru Maharaj, you could think, well, he’s very strict. It has to be this way and everything perfect. And only Srila Guru, Guru Govinda Maharaj can deliver that type of seva. But he’s accepting all of us in the background. But he’s the only one who can really deal with Srila Guru Maharaj directly. And Guru Maharaj cannot tolerate if one thing is off. Because that’s the service of Radharani, everything has to be perfect every time, first time, every time. So he’s saying, but if you think so, that he’s as dharmic as Ramachandra. And if you might think, on account of that, maybe he’s not as gracious or merciful. And he said, no, so he’s combining the dharmic level of Ramachandra. And saying, but he is more merciful than Bir Chandra Prabhu.
And you say, well, what is the evidence for that. It was astonishing enough for us to think that someone could be more merciful than Nityananda. Now you’re saying then that’s Bir Chandra. And now you’re telling Srila Sridhara, he’s more merciful than Bir Chandra Prabhu. Because he is including this because it’s Bir Chandra Prabhu’s appearance day. And Gurudev said, yes, because my Guru Maharaj saved me. He saved this soul. And we never think of him as a fallen soul, but as someone who can perfectly represent our position. So in that way, and then Srila Guru Maharaj, who’s like that, it took Srila Gurudev to include all of us. To mercifully, by his inconceivably generous and liberal heart, to accept all of us in service to the lotus feet of his Guru Maharaj.
And one other thing Maharaj said, like, so we can understand about Prabhupada spreading Krishna consciousness all over the world. And he said, what also Gurudev, what was it, 26 times or it keeps going up. I mean, it’s in the 20s, the mid-20s, world tours and everything. 24, 26, considering what would be the right land, what qualifies. And only Maharaj, Sridhan Maharaj, can answer what qualifies as a world tour. He has a system of analysis. But so Yudhamanyu Prabhu and Jivan Didi, when they came to help me in San Jose to promote Guru Maharaj, they arrived in something that was affectionately known as the garbage truck. That’s what he left ISKCON with, this flatbed truck. That’s only purpose was to carry refuse to a dump, like once a week. They said, alright, well, I guess you can have that, you know, on your way out. So they show up in that, you know. And that’s the vehicle that we have.
And I just remember, so Yudhamanyu and I, we’re going across the Golden Gate Bridge. That’s that famous bridge, the entrance and exit of San Francisco. And it’s a very noisy truck, and we’re bouncing along and everything. And this point comes up. He’s saying, what do we say to those people who say he’s never left the veranda in Navadwip. He’s preaching all these high things, but he didn’t go outside of India and go around the world. And you know, what did we say to that. You know, and I’m sitting on the other side. And I got this inspiration, I said, Prabhu, when we get finished with what we’re about to do, singing like the Guardian of Devotion, pray all these books. I said, don’t worry, I guarantee you it won’t be an issue anymore. When we’re done, nobody will bring this up as an issue anymore. Because Guru Maharaj is going to go all over the world.
And I had to say it to Guru Maharaj, just because I would never forgive myself if I didn’t say it. So I said to him, knowing fully well what the answer would be. I said, Maharaj, if Your Divine Grace would consider, you know, just visiting America once. Saraswati Thakur wanted you to preach in the Western world. And we can all arrange that without the least inconvenience to yourself. If you would just come to America one time, and all the devotees will come and everything. And Guru Maharaj said, yes, it was my Guru Maharaj’s desire, because he said he can’t be converted. And to give his level of representation. And Guru Maharaj said, but my health is not possible now. He said, but I will see America and all of the world through the eyes of Srila Govinda Maharaj. He will go. And this is around 1983. This is not 1985. This is ’82, ’83. He’s saying, through Govinda Maharaj, that will be achieved.
So Srila Bhakti Rakhak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj ki jai. Srila Guru Maharaj. And just want to say, we’re going to have the Guru Puja. Abhiram Prabhu will sing the Sri Guru Charna Padma. But just to remind everyone here and those who might be viewing from different parts of the world, we will be assembling again in this Chiang Mai time, 7:30 p.m. Consult your guide for what that time is in different parts of the world. And just like we’re doing the parikrama for last so many evenings, tonight’s a special night dedicated to the appearance day of His Divine Grace. And as I got to speak extensively now, I’m hoping at that time to just sort of encapsulate briefly and then turn the mic over to the so many other devotees, direct disciples of Srila Guru Maharaj, like Devashish Prabhu and some others. And of course, Srila Bhaktivedanta Maharaj, other Maharajs, and leading disciples of Srila Gurudev, Srila Govinda Maharaj, around the world. And that will be this evening. So that’s something also to look forward to.
And like Srila Maharaj said, actually, he’s going to be doing this all day. He’s already doing it, but he’s going to be doing it all day in the Ukraine, you know, in Crimea. And remember, Russia’s got many time zones. Ukraine is not Russia, I must, you know, it has its own time zone and other zone. But the Russian Federation still has so many time zones. So Maharaj will just be going like non-stop around the clock. And as it should be, full of Bhakti Rakhak Sridhar Dev-Goswami Maharaj Muhammad he. And we’re going to have.
