---
type: post
lang: en
title: "The first day of spring. Goddess Saraswati."
authors:
  - Bhakti Sudhir Goswami
date: "2012-01-28"
location: "Gupta Govardhan, Chiang Mai"
audio:
  file: en_2012-01-28_The_First_Day_Of_Spring_Goddess_Saraswati.mp3
  mahamandala: https://mahamandala.com/en/audios/359/download
duration: "00:50:57"
transcribers:
  - Nalina Sundari d.d.
tags:
  - Saraswati
slug: en-2012-01-28-the-first-day-of-spring-goddess-saraswati
status: draft
license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
---

00:00:00

So, this is incredibly auspicious day. So, we're told from the one point of view vasant-panchami, vasant means spring. So it's the first day of spring, and if we were in India we would see that the all the ladies on this day they wear yellow and preferably new, brand new, yellow, like a yellow sari, yellow dress, something yellow, because that's Saraswati's colour. And Gopal is telling also they put turmeric, some people are a little extreme, they mix turmeric and they put it, I mean, they're yellow. They really wanna be. But we've seen, and they go to school too, because what Guru Maharaj will say, is Saraswati, one of her others names is Vak Devi, means the goddess of speech, like vacho-vegam-manasa-kroda (?), we hear vak. Like the last line in one of Guru Maharaja's pranams for Srila Saraswati Thakur, vilasatu hrdi nityam bhakti siiddhanta, this is you can get a little insight in Guru Maharaja's thinking, it's Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati, this is his genius, siddhantic genius, ontological genius, poetic genius. So, here it says, bhaktisiddhanta, and because Saraswati can become vak or vani, so he puts vilasatu hrdi nityam bhaktisiddhanta vani. Which means, "May the voice of Srila Saraswati Thakur forever play in my heart, like vilas." That's a very mystical word vilas, once we had a big discussion about that at the Math in Guru Maharaja's times, just like what vilas could mean? So, anyway, vilasatu hrdi, in my heart may his divine words play. So, this is a prayer of every disciple, that the words of their Guru will play in their heart eternally. That's the discussion we're actually having the whole week, you and I, it's that those words will play in our heart, and by playing means have their way, their influence.

  00:02:51

So, anyway, Saraswati, she is taken as that, and there is some mystical connection with this line, it is not accidental also, that Srila Saraswati Thakur has that name, Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati, and Saraswata brahmanas, who descend in the particular line, and Sri Chaitanya Saraswt Math, there is a lot there. And once the artist from ISKCON, it was my job to take them to Guru Maharaj, they wanted to ask some questions about the Bhrahma-samhita, how to make some paintings, and he gave an amazing talk, it's his famous talk, I've published it a few different times, it begins with, some question is asked about the hexagonal plane, and Guru Maharaj said, "I am sorry, but we are forbidden to speak on this exoteric confidential matters," and he gives this wonderful talk, that's what trigger is (?), is asking questions on behalf of the artist, but in this sense don't want to explore that, but rather something else, so when it came, we hear in the Brahma-samhita, that Saraswati, she initiates Brahma, this is before there is a creation, so this is what is known as Divya Saraswati, because there is the Saraswati, Goddess within the world, then there is also Divya Saraswati of Vaikuntha, of the upper world. So, because in Brahma-samhita it's saying at one point how she is initiating, gives mantram to Bramha, they wanted to have some painting about Saraswati, so they asked Srila Guru Maharaj about this. What is the word for carrier? Vaman? Bahan? Alright, bahan, means you're carrier. Like Siva rides Nandi, Brahma, so they're asking, "How whould Saraswati be shown?" (?) so Guru Maharaj he looked like, he shots his eyes and he goes, "She is riding a white swan." You know, like he looked. [laughs]

  00:06:00

So, that's the goddess Saraswati, and she is the goddess of learning, so that means of speech, whenever we see a picture of her, you know, you'll see this beautiful goddess and she is playing a vina, looks like sitar, and four-armed, she has writing in one hand and the musical instrument in another, and a lotus flower, so, she is goddess of speech, singing, and learning, so, naturally all the students on this day they pray to her for some blessings, that they'll be successful at school and learning like that, that kind of thing. And we know in the pastimes of Mahaprabhu there is also Kesava Kasmiri, and he was said to be the favorite son of the goddess Saraswati, that's why he could compose poetry, those hundred slokas and prayers of the Ganga, that he composed spontaneously on the banks of the Ganga for Nimai, in the presence of Nimai Pandit and His disciples.

  00:07:17

So, also it is appearance day of Visnupriya, who was the wife of Nimai Pandit and this is something that's very hard-rending and difficult to comprehend and understand, that she. Sometimes we think, our preface is by saying, "What is her contribution?" This is interesting, because we'll say, "Oh, she is the wife of Nimai Pandit (?)." But Guru Maharaj put it in another way, he said, "She gave what is her own, what belongs to her is what she is giving to the world." What belongs to her? Nimai Pandit. Later Sri Krsna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, it's her property. So, in one sense (?), everything we have was given by her, because she gave Nimai Pandit, who becomes Mahaprabhu. And this is in the Srmad Bhagavatam sloka, we're told, it ends by, vande purusate charanaravindam (?), it is ostensively about Ram-lila, the Pastimes of Ramachandra, but Visvanath Chakravarti says, and it's also his day, he gives an interpretation, that not Ram-lila, but Gaur-lila, and his famous sloka it says,

  00:09:11

tyaktva sudusta ja surepsata raja laksmim dharmista arja bachasaya …aranyam mayam mrtam dvaitam ipsitam anda badam vande maahapurusate charanaravindam

  00:09:28

It's seems to be saying, Ramachandara was cursed by a Brahmin, he had to go to the forest, give up the royal throne, go to the forest with Sita and Laksman, and maym-rigam, in the form of the deer, maya, Marchi came and got Sita to step outside of the  Laksman reka, circle that was protecting her. Even today, what samskar (?) in India? This Laksman, Laksman reka. So, we know to protect Sita he draws this circle around her and nothing can cross it. But Marichi in the form of the deer, a little fon (?) comes dancing and so cute and charming and gets her to step out of the circle, where they can capture her. So, to this day in Bengal, in your kitchen, if you want to keep away certain things, they have this chalk and it's called Laksman-reka, so you draw it around things. Gopal knows it. Cause it comes in a little box, this "Laksman-reka". So, they are still, it's so deep, that's what we mean by samskara, this deep, not only mental impression, but you're carrying life after life, it's like in the DNA, we can say. So, anyway, that's what it appears to be saying. But Visvanath Chakravarti Thakur says, tyaktva suduschaja, what do we have to give up? Surepjata raja laksmim, here raja-laksmi means Visnupriya. It's saying, the throne, the royal throne of the Krsna-prem in her heart, that's where Nimai Pandit he resided and that he had to give up. Aranya-bachasa, the curse of the Brahmin, was that we told before, one Brahmin man he was not being allowed in the kirttan, they'd hear (?) the pancha-tattva having their ecstatic kirttan behind closed doors, people would hear that, envious people they would say like, "They are bunch of drunkers and womenizer.  Lord only knows what's going on inside there." That was one group. But there was another group, who knew this was rasa-kirttan, it was ecstatic kirttan, they wanted to get inside, but only those who had sufficient adhikar are allowed, and that's evidence, by that time, the bhav is not coming to Mahaprabhu, He says, "I can't get taste any rasa tonight." And Srivas Thakur he can look (?), "There must be someone here, who is unqualified." What we call adhikar, qualification, capacity. So, they are searching around, and we know in India there are very big  (?) baskets and sometimes they turn them upside down, they lift up this basket, they see Srivas Thakur's mother-in-law. And they like drag her out. It's a pastime.

  00:13:10

So, Brahman who cursed was told, he thought his qualification was he only drink milk, and as Guru Maharaj said, "Just drinking milk, milk drinking that is no qualification." So, he was being rejected, he became upset and he cursed Nimai Pandit, "You will not have happy family life for you, I curse you, you'll have to go tho the forest, aranya, means, it's a euphemism, aranyam means forest, but it's a euphemism for sannyas also, like we say, tirtha-asram, aranya parbat puri bharati, so aranya in this context can mean sannyas, "(?) enjoy a happy family life, you'll have to take sannyas, that is my curse." Yadagat aranyam mayamrgam dvaitam ipsitam anvadavat, here it says, mayamrgam, chasing after maya, says that He will take sannyas and then those who are chasing after maya, He wil run after them, he will chase after those who are chasing after maya and rescue them. That's who Mahaprabhu is. So, vande mahapurusa te charanaravindam. And that Visnupriya, we know it's so heartrending, after six years of taking sannyas Mahaprabhu comes back to Navadwip and we're told that time Sacimata and Visnupriya, there is a big crowd, how big is this crowd? On one hand we're told it's a lakh of people, but we know from Rupa Goswami, the first verse of Chaitanyastakam, sadopasya sriman drpta manuja kaye pranaitam bahadbi girvane girisa paramresti pravritibhi, means here Girisa, Giris means Siva and Brahma, they are coming disguised as human beings, they also want to have a glimpse of beauty of Mahaprabhu, which Guru Maharaj has described, svarna-koti darpanabha deha vana gouravam padma parijata ganda vanditanga soruvam koti kami murchitangri rupa rasa rangaram prema dhama devam eva naumi goura sundaram, as Krsna has been compared, the beauty of ten million Cupids personified, here Guru Maharaj says, ten million Cupids will faint to see the golden, mirror like beauty of Gauranga Mahaprabhu, svarna koti darpanabha, like ten million brilliant mirrors of gold shining, the ten million Cupids will faint, koti kami murchi ta, murchi ta, they will lose consciousness seeing His beauty. So we hear, demigods and their wives they are descending as Brahmins, they are mixing with the people. So, when everyone goes to see Mahaprabhu, (?) a big crowd to begin with it becomes inconceivably large, as devas are mixing with humans to have a glimpse, but in that crowd is Sacimata and Visnupriya, remember Visnupriya was fourteen years old, when Mahaprabhu left, inconceivable, now, so she is twenty let's say. And we're told, she is wearing, Guru Maharaj say, dirty wrapper, not dressed nicely, her clothes are all, she is like uncapped (?) looking, and Sacimata is there, they only speak by inference, she says to Sacimata, "There is your sun." She doesn't say, "There is my…," no, "There is your sun." And Mahaprabhu realizes out of His peripheral vision where she is and thinking of the pain of separation that is in her heart, what sacrifice she is making for Him, so He wears the padukas, these old style wooden shoes, he steps out of the padukas and sending eternal message like, "Maybe this will bring some relief to the separation you're suffering in your heart," and He goes on, everyone's following Him, Visnupriya comes and clutches those padukas, those wooden shoes, and we're told later, today, what they call, sometimes they call Visnupriya Bari, sometimes Mahaprabhu Bari, but their house, where there is this Deity, you see an offering mudra in Navadwip of Gauranga Mahaprabhu, pujaris sometimes bring our those padukas, and put them on your head, to the fortunate souls.

  00:19:05

And we're told she would take Krsna-nam and for every Hare Krsna, she takes some grain of rice and put that in the pot and when she took sufficient Krsna-nam, there'll be some rice, then that would be cooked, and Guru Maharaj said, and that would be dedicated to Krsna and then afterward she would somehow maintain herself. And later in the aftermath, when Mahaprabhu, she commissioned a Deity, we're told, when the Deity maker came (?) here's representation, she dismissed that Deity, the second time they bring again, but in the third time she drew her vail (?)and cover herself, because she recognized her husband. So, that type of accuracy of beauty and representation.

  00:20:22

And I have to say this too with regard to our beloved Vasinav Maharaj. That once on this day, it was in 1977 we were in Jagannath Puri together and later Srila Prabhupad Swami Maharaj came. So, we decided to go to Gaudia Math or we got invited I think, Purusuttam Gaudia Math,  because it's a big celebration. But there was hardly any, I mean, we were like the two guests, and  there was this one man, I will never forget him, an older type vaisnav, grhastha, and his name was Dr. Syamasundar Brahmachari. I think you get his vibe already. Dr. Syamasundar Brahmachari. An extraordinary looking personality and very intense personality also. So, we were like two honourable dignified guests, we were probably, I don't know how old, I guess I was twenty-four or five years old, but we were like the guests, maybe a couple of local orion (?) devotees, but he has made a big feast and he wants to serve everybody. And I am thinking, "He is so much older than us, he is senior, perhaps he is a disciple of Saraswati Thakur, we were someone in awe of him," and I stand up and say, "I can help serve." And he was like, "No, no, no, you sit down (?)" Then I am saying, "This really doesn't seem right," we were the kids and I go, "You know, I'll help, there is so many and you by yourself." "No-no-no, basru, you sit." And I pushed it one more time, "Really, I can…" and he goes, "Do not disturb me." And I am like, I set down, like, "Okay." And when I set down, he is like smiling again, then he got all the prasadam and is like so happy to serve. We know Nitya Gopal Prabhu he has that quality, happy to serve others. We're, I am happy to be served, but that, Guru Maharaj said, Krsna Consciousness is all about giving and what was that Bengali saying, "If you have nothing else to give, give some ash, dust, anything." But let your hand practice giving. So, we happily took that prasadam and he chanted Jayadhvani so many very extensively, so we were the recipients of sometimes forceful mercy from the vaisnavas. Sometimes they make us drink nectar. And we are unwilling. And this is something that goes on a very deep levels.

  00:24:11

Vilapa-kusamanjali of Raghunath Das Goswami, the mysterious sloka, vairagya yug batirasa prayatnahi apaya yam mam anavipsam antam krpam buddhi yam para dukha dukhi sanatanam stvam prabhu asrayami (?), he is giving prayer, he has one for Rupa Goswami but this one is for Sanatan Goswami, and he says, "I was unwilling to drink this nectar," vayragya yug bhakti rasa, "But Sanatan Goswami he is very merciful, he force me to drink this nectarine substance and now I am so happy. I've taken shelter of him," so this vairagya there, Gurudev said it is a mysterious thing,  if we try to understand the vairagya of Das Goswami. In Govardhan sometimes Gurudev would talk in a very mystical happy way about doing his bhajan in Govardhan, say, "I will go there with some of my friends and he would say the different trees that will be there, the bakul, champak, and the madhavi, malati, kadamba, and champak means like the Goloka-champak, Bengal, they have here, plumerias, what are they called in Thai, you know that white flower, you know from Hawaii, Lilavati? That's auspicious. So, Gurudev when he was there, he would and his arati for Giriraj he mentions Raghunath Das Goswami, cause it's Das Goswami days, nijani kathanivasam dehi govardhanatvam (?). In his prayers to Govardhan he is saying, "Please, allow me to be near you, nijani kate, nearby." That mood, just that little thing, not up in the front. Like sometimes Gurudev would quote a song aobut Ma Kali devotee and he's saying, "I don't want to be up in the front of themple of your arati but in the back of the temple somewhere, in a corner somewhere if you have a place for me," he liked that mood very much.

  00:27:18

That's the parallel here, nikata nimasta dehi govardhanatvam, Das Goswami is praying to Govardhan, cause we hear, why the name Srimati Radharani and Radhe, and more specifically Radhe Radhe is very sacred to Guru Maharaj, and he does not like the casual taking of Her name or in this way, because in the song, we're told that Gourkisor Das Babji Maharaj is singing when Saraswati Thakur met him and like for one line we know you can hear this, they sing every day in Radha Damodar temple, one line it says, muka radhe radhe boli bese nayanera jale radhe radhe, crowling on his hands and knees Raghunath Das Goswami with tears streaming down his eyes he is crying out the name o Radharani and his dress is soaked (?), saturated, so many tears are pouring from his eyes. And Guru Maharaj he is always quoting Saraswati Thakur, particularly he said, although Saraswati Thakur meticulously suppressed any emotional display when he would hear this one sloka of Raghunath Das Goswami said sometimes he would share that with his intimate servitors and cry uncontrollably. That person who is the personification, jati raja ganai parisevya padam, the personification of gravity and sannyasa-ta, that he would crying uncontrollably, when chanting those asa bore amrta sindhu mayi katham cha kalo mayati gamitakhila sampatami gamchi krpa mayevidasa dasa vinaivakinme prane brajena chaborurobakarinapi. Guru Maharaj liked this so much, because he said here Raghunath Das Goswami, showing why he is the prayojana-tattva acharja, who is indicating what our goal is, our ultimate necessity and target, Radha-dasyam.

  00:30:10

asavare amrta-sindhu, he's saying, my aspiration it's an aspiration to serve Your holy lotus feet, he said, it is a prayer to Radharani. That aspiration is what is being keeping me alive, and if that is not fulfilled then of what use is my life? What is more valuable than my life? Vrndavan? And Guru Maharaj would say, and although it is a shameful thing to say, without You, Krsna is a dreadful thing. Bakarinapi, baka, bakari means the killer of Bakasura, like the demon killer. So, within this verse Guru Maharaj what is extracting from there, is Radha-dasyam, this intense exlusive devotion to the service of the holy lotus feet of Srimati Radharani. Sri radha pada sevanamrtam aho tadami sobhavan.

  00:31:16

And Radhunandan Thakur was a boy, little boy devotee. Sometimes Mahaprabhu would joke with his father, "In your family, who is the father, you or Raghunandan?" What is that? He realized, "Oh, what he means to say is, ‘Who has superior devotion? Who is the father in that sense, more evolved, more mature.'" And so Mukunda would answer, "Raghunandan." And we know it's that Raghunandan, how do we get a glimpse of his type of devotion? They have a family Deity, the father goes on a medical visit, and leaves the boy, and said, "You'll offer the Deity his bhog." Time comes for the offering and little boy, he is not acquainted with all the rituals, procedures, he goes behind the curtain, puts the plate down and said to Deity, like, "Now, you'll take." But the Deity is like [numb]. "Now, please." And the Deity is like Deities is an apparent non-moving position. And then the boy starts to cry, "If you don't eat then my father will be angry at me, I'll get in trouble." It's so pure, so pure-hearted, this is raga-bhakti, this is jnana-sunya bhakti, it's just pure. And this is what we're told, sometimes this is misunderstood, so always they say, the raga-marg bhaktas they don't follow any rules or regulations, right. No, it's saying, no rule or regulations should come to restrict this type of heart flow, not the inverse. So, the Deity's heart melts, by the pure love and affection of Raghunandan Thakur and he sits down and starts eating. And Raghunandan is very happy and leaves. That's all he wanted. He thinks this is normal, like I'm the new person, so, maybe he didn't understand or you know, alright, now everything is okay, He is eating. That type of believe, talk about samskar, he believes this what the Deity does everyday, why is He not doing it today? Did I do something wrong? So, when the father comes back and he wants, it's a long hard day, like Manasa Krsna, he wants to take some prasadam, ask Radhunandan, "Can I have a little?" He goes, "The Deity ate everything." His father is saying, "The Deity ate everything? Usually they leave something. Usually they duplicate whatever we are (?) and leave that." "Well, not today. Must have been very hungry. Because he ate everything." His father is saying, "Show me how you do this." They cook again, go there, but when the father is there and Raghunandan is making his pleading the Deity is remaining here. Only when the father leaves, now he is confused, "Before you did, now you don't." It's a jnana-sunya bhakta, then the father leaves for a second, then the Deity leaves, grabs everything, then the father's back in, when he comes back he sees there is the Deity and there is a laddu in His hand. And then Mukunda realizes, "My son is very advanced."

  00:35:34

And that Raghunandan Thakur, there are seven kirttan parties for the Ratha-yatra, each one has a lead singer, a lead dancer, responders, everything. Nityananda in one party, Advaita, etc. So, one party, what are they from? Srikhanda? There is a town called Srikhand or something late that, Sikhanda. Raghunandan, he leads that party, he's an excellent dancer and he is also very beautiful. Guru Maharaj said some people say that he was an incarnation of Pradyumna Avatar, was very beautiful in Dvaraka. So, these are extraordinary devotees and Pundarik Vidyanidhi, we would say this about, Mahaprabhu called him Premanidhi, his name was Pundarik Vidyanidhi, but he called him Pramanidhi. Why? Because when he saw him he said, "Now, I got my life back, my eyes back, my everything back, because Krsna-pram personified is in front of me." If Mahaprabhu says that about someone and they mystically, sometimes Mahaprabhu inexplicably with his group, he'll be going, "Bap! Bap! Pundarik!" Means ‘father', Pundarik. And they thought, "Who is this? His father is Jagannatha." They don't know how to interpret that. Why? Because radha-bhava-dyuti-suvalita, in Radha-bhav as Radharani, Radharani's father is Vrsabhanu Maharaj. So, in Radha-bhav he goes, "Bap! Father!" It's like Radharani calling to Vrsabhanu Maharaj. But Mahaprabhu is calling to Pundarik Vidyanidhi, that's who is Krsna-lila. Gour-lila ans we're told that Gadadhar Pandit had not taken initiation and Mukunda, his friend told him, "If some qualified vaisnava comes then I'll connect you." And, what was this place called, "Chitagam of Chitagram?" In East Bengal, Chatragram. That's where Pundaril Vidyanidhi is from, so, in those days they keep like a little bottle of Ganga-water in your house.

  00:38:14

Like Guru Maharaj said about professor Sannyal, his whole life he saw they would keep a little bottle of Ganga-jal, and on special occasion put a drop on something. So, when he finally saw the Ganga as this water, he fainted. He couldn't believe it. Cause his whole life they would treat it like a liquid gold, because it's more than that. It's is liquid, jagad-prema-dhatri drava brama, it is liquid, more than liquid gold. So, Pundarik Vidyanidhi come to Navadwip to have darsan of the Ganga. And we're told too, whenever whenever (?) go at night, he would go on the bank and he would take a few drops and put it on his head and that way, but when he came. So, he is coming to Navadwip for Ganga-darsan and Ganga-puja, then Mukunda tells Gadadhar, "Here's your chance to meet the vaisnava, this is it." And GAdadhar is so happy, but we're told, Pundarik Vidyanidhi comes on a palki, palanquin, you know, they have four man, who carry, he is on the top, and his hair is oiled very nicely, his wearing perfume, silk clothes, he is smoking a hooka. Like Gurudev said to that man who used to smoke the hooka, Gurudev told him, "I know your hooka is saying something. It's saying Hare Krsna. Listen carefully."

  00:40:02

Gurudev knew how to get somebody psyche. Told him, "Your hooka is chanting Hare Krsna." Anyhow, he is up there and there are mirrors on the side and he is looking at himself  and seeing how beautiful he looks. And we could say, "Oh, that's pretty egotistical, but he is Krsna-prem personified, he is prema-nidhi, he can view himself from the position of detachment and have some appreciation, it's extraordinary. So, he is like that and coming to town with the big hooka and carried by the man, and Mukunda das goes like, "There is the vaisnava." And Gadadhar Pandit, "That's the vaisnava?" "Yes. What do you think?" And Gadadhara  Pandit could not conceal his hesitation, apprehension. So, then Mukunda thinks, "Oh, I see. You think he is a mundane man, you're seeing him, you want to see him as stereotype of what Guru is. You want to stereotype, that he'll look this way, and talk this way, and walk this way, you want all of that. You want the superficial. So, that's deceiving you. You're looking from an objective point of view. Let's subjective evolution of consciousness. Guru Maharaj he has written one book, Subjective Evolution of Consciousness, you need subjective evolution. So, Mukunda, we heard a great singer, he start singing, he wants, the vaisnavas, they're hiding themselves, like, it's interesting, in the neophyte position everyone wants to advertise, that some feeling came to me, they want others to know how great they are, how much affection, so many things. But the higher devotees, they are concealing that. What did we say before? Saraswati Thakur, he is hiding that, but sometimes can not control it. Ahaituki apratihata, it's irresistible. Guru Maharaj like the word irresistible. So, the first line of defense of the vaisnava is to resist. They don't try to augment, they try to resist, saying, "Who am I? A man from the street, unqualified, why should these, these are not real sentiments." They resist it, and when it reaches the point where it cannot be resisted then they may think something genuine came.

  00:43:00

So, anyway he is concealing himself and appearing like a visayi, a sense enjoyer. As Vamsidas Babaji Maharaj sometimes did things to deceive the insincere. Like what's that line? Gativan chita van chakachintya padam, it's a little mystical, the cheaters and the cheated, he is dealing with both groups. So, Mukunda knows, "If I will touch his heart, then Pundarik will come out." So, he starts singing the sloka,

  00:43:37

aho baki anstanatam kala kutam…kam va dayalum saranam brajema

  00:43:52

Who is the more merciful Lord than Krsna, who is more worthy to take shelter than him. Putana, raksasi, the witch, she came with a poisoned breast to murder Krsna, and what did Krsna do? Datri, He took her as nurse, as mother, and liberated Her. So, the point here, "If that's how He treats his enemies, it's inconceivable how He would reciprocate friendship or affection, what to speak of something more than that." So, kamva soyalum saranam brajema, who is the more merciful Lord than Krsna? Hearing that srtuck the sympathetic core in the heart of Pundarik Vidyanidhi. And then he starts experiencing ecstatic symptoms, his hair are standing on end and trembling, and he keeps saying, "Kam va dayalum sharanam brajema." Who is the more worshipable Lord than Krsna?!" Throws his hooka down and the silk pillows, tearing his hairs, he falls out of the palanquin on the floor, he is crawling on his hands and knees, and then goes into a nine hour trance. For nine hours appearing as if he is not alive any more. That means fainted here, but not there, he's gone so deep into that plane, he appears fainted, almost dead for nine hours.

  00:45:27

Then Gadadhar Pandit thinks, "I've made a big mistake, a real vaisnava, I thought he, I looked at him form an external point of view, thought he was an ordinary man, oh, what am I going to do?" And we're told, if you've committed some offense like that, the Guru he doesn't take the offenses of the disciple, like a parent and a child. So, then he's told, "If you'll take initiation from him, which is the original idea, then whatever aparadh was there will be forgiven." But he is thinking, "But Nimai Pandit he's my Lord, he is my prem." And Nimai said, "No, he is your father." Cause he is Gadadhar Pandit, it's PUndarik Vidyanidhi, Vrsabhanu Maharaj, he is your Guru, as Guru-varga, also means mother and father too, so it's a mystical play, but Mahaprabhu makes it clear, "Yes, you should approach him." So, he does.

  00:46:34

And the last thing a want to say is just about the disciple of Srila Saraswati Thakur. Bharati Maharaj, Guru Maharaj said was a good preacher, this Bhakti Vivek Bharati, very good preacher, but this Parvat Maharaj that he mentioned, he live next door to Bhaktivinod Thakur. Is that possible? In swananda sukada kunj, so, where the Svarup Ganj, that part. So, he said, Bhaktivinod Thakur, he'd been to his house, next door at the boundary wall separating, at maybe three o'clock in the morning, Bhaktivinod Thakur would be out in the stone bench taking Ksna-nam. Where all these things happened, the breeze that comes by toward Mayapur and that's Nrsimhadev, and so many things, the walk in the sky and Myapur being revealed and all these things. He is living next door, and he said, he would hear him at three o'clock in the morning chanting loudly the name of Krsna, he said, it sounded like he was calling of to his beloved in a distance. Guru Maharaj said like, "Krsna! Krsna! Krsna!" It was so startling, he would come from his house, "Who is he calling?" It was such earnestness and piteous voice sometimes as beloved. So, when he heard that that forever entered his heart, changed him, qualified him and he approached the lotus feet of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur for initiation.

  00:48:29

And you said, Radhunath Bhatta also, and just we'd like to say, that Gurudev loved to hear slokas, and chanted himself, Raghunath Bhatta he could sing slokas, sometimes we heard in four different tunes at least or so many different ways, that was very pleasing to Mahaprabhu and the other devotees to hear him reside(?) slokas from the Bhagavatam. He would also do menial service when he was younger for Mahaprabhu, like clean his plates and help with prasadam and different things and later in his life when we're told also he never wanted to hear blasphemy of any vaisnav, he forbid that, taking so much Krsna-nam everyday, giving so many dandavats everyday. He had one grhastha disciple, who was very wealthy and that disciple approached him and said, "I want to do some seva, is there something I could do?" And Raghunath Batta says, "Oh, who I consider Guru, Rupa Goswami, he has this Deity, Govinda, Govindaji, if you could make a nice temple for Govindaji, that would be good seva for you." So, that temple that we see in Vrndavan, that was later, it was originally about seven stores, and a Mogol king removed three, but that Govindaji Mandir was built by his disciple, they offered him some seva, he said, "Build the temple for Govindaji and the glory of Govindaji and Rupa Goswami."

  00:50:16

So, we're so fortunate to even vibrate the names of these souls, the vaisnava calendar, that we observe is such a wonderful thing, because regularly we get some cause for celebration and remembrance, that's what it's meant. So, every time it's here, we hear something about them, try to say something to praise them, our Guru-varga will be pleased with that, that's what they've taught us, and somehow by this remembrance we stay in contact with that plane and our lives are flooded with auspiciousness. Hare Krsna.
